 The Rolling Stones , Genesis , Bonnie Tyler , The Wonder Stuff and , ( ulp ) , Uriah Heep -- 20 YEARS OF THE READING FESTIVAL NEW MUSICAL EXPRESS Dope opera Pretend you've always liked NIRVANA ! 

  Win their first album ! 

  THE HITS AND THE MISSUS Nirvana Fight For Their Life L7 * CHARLES MANSON * SEBADOH * BLACK DOG * JULIANA HATFIELD * PAUL MERTON * EUGENIUS * 808 STATE * SONIC YOUTH DISCOGRAPHY 

  NEWS 

  No peace for " hyped " Don-E 

  DON-E , British soul hopeful , is at the centre of the latest investigation into chart hyping following irregular sales patterns surrounding the singer's recent " Peace In The World " 45 . 

  The BPI clampdown following suspicious activities surrounding Don-E's August single once again calls into question the credibility of the singles chart , after a spate of hyping controversies last year involving London Records , Rhythm King and Virgin Records and artists like S-Express and The High . 

  Don-E's Island release " Peace In The World " was disqualified from the charts after the hi-tech security system used by chart compilers Gallup picked up an unusually high concentration of sales in the south London area . 

  Gallup's concern over the unusual sales pattern was heightened when several record shops in the area phoned in with details of the registration number of a car used in the alleged hyping . 

  Following the submission of a Gallup report on the matter the BPI have decided to instigate a full investigation with hearings set for early September . 

  A BPI spokesperson told trade magazine Music Week : " It was felt that suspicions were sufficiently strong to justify a full enquiry . " 

  Island Records have consistently denied knowledge of any questionable sales tactics , claiming they are " blameless " . 

  However , it is widely recognised within the music industry that the use of " target teams " and pressure selling is common in the singles market . 

  CONSOLIDATED have announced details of their keenly anticipated third album . 

  The 27-track LP , " Play More Music " , is released on the Nettwerk Europe label on September 28 . 

  " Play More music " , which follows last year's highly acclaimed " Friendly Fascism " LP , was self-produced by the San Francisco-based three-piece and mixed by Meat Beat Manifesto's Jack Dangers . 

  HAPPY MONDAYS have been forced to delay the release of their long-awaited single " Stinkin' Thinkin' " until September 7 . 

  The band's first single from the forthcoming album " ... 

  Yes Please " has been held back due to production problems surrounding their promotional video . 

  Details of their biggest UK tour in three years are expected next week . 

  Madstock mess rumbles on 

  MORRISSEY and organisers of the ill-fated Madstock Finsbury Park concerts are embroiled in a legal battle , with both parties threatening to sue each other over Morrissey's non-appearance on the Sunday bill . 

  A spokesperson for Morrissey confirmed that " legal discussions are underway " and it's believed he is consulting his advisers over non-payment of his performance fee . 

  Promoters , The Mean Fiddler Group , are said to be seeking compensation for non-fulfilment of his contract as well as a separate settlement for bringing their organisation into disrepute . 

  In a bizarre twist to the story , NME has learned that the robbery of a Mean Fiddler employee nearly led to the cancellation of the second day of the festival . 

  Nearly 35,000 in cash and 450,000 in cheques is believed to have been stolen from the administrator's home following the first show on Saturday . 

  Only a last-minute collection of Mean Fiddler reserve funds , driven to the Finsbury Park site in a Securicor van , allegedly prevented the bands pulling on the Sunday . 

  The Mean Fiddler declined to comment on the legal battle and the theft . 

  - Meanwhile , LEVITATION have been forced to move their warm-up show for this weekend's Reading Festival from London Clapham Grand tonight to the New Cross Venue . 

  According to one insider , the Mean Fiddler organisation has refused to host any Reading warm-ups after losing the franchise to the festival earlier this year . 

  Angst Morrissey special , page 54 . 

  The shirt hits the fans : Morrissey , on stage at the ill-starred Madness gig 

  BA announces departures 

  THE BLUE AEROPLANES had another two members bale out from the band last week , with the departure of bassist Andy McCreeth and guitarist Hazel Winter . 

  The line-up is now down to a five-piece , guitarist Angelo Bruschini having quit the group less than a month ago . 

  No official reason was given for McCreath and Winter leaving , but rumours suggest that they had tired of their peripheral roles within the band set-up . 

  Despite the upheaval , the band will continue work on their forthcoming LP and also intend to play NME's Viva Eight show with Green On Red and A House at London's Town &amp;amp; Country Club on September 3 . 

  Mighty Lemon Drops bassist Marcus Williams , Katydids vocalist Susie Hugg and 18-year-old former roadie Bob will fill in on the day . 

  Singer Gerard Langley told NME : " I do not recall having any arguments with Hazel or Andy , but there was definitely an absence of enthusiasm from them . 

  I want to work with people who want to have a good time . 

  " Andy wrote one song in four years and Hazel was halfway through her first of the year . 

  We're three-quarters of the way through our new LP , but it probably will not surface until next February . " 

  As previously reported , the band's second volume of B-sides and out-takes " Friendloverplane 2 " is released through Chrysalis on September 21 . 

  Runway boys ( and girl ) : clockwise from bottom , 

  Mute miffed at new chart 

  THE INDIE debate took a new turn last week , with the news that MUTE RECORDS may lead a boycott of the planned " alternative " chart along with several other prominent independently distributed labels . 

  Mute's stance follows the news that music industry magazine Music Week is taking the first step to redefining the term " independent " by running " a genre chart open to all-comers " , next to " an old-style distribution chart " , from September 19 . 

  The new chart has been given the thumbs up by Food Records Andy Ross , whose acts ( including Blur and Jesus Jones ) are exempt from the current chart . 

  He told NME : " This is not a question of a lobby trying to dismantle the independent chart , it's a matter of an established clique actively obstructing the creation of a chart . " 

  However , Mute General Manager Osman Eralp told NME : " The pathetic part of this whole situation is that the American industry is increasing its interest in independent distribution , because it realises that big is not necessarily better . 

  If there is no adequate coverage for independently distributed records , there is no doubt that the labels will suffer . " 

  POWER OF DREAMS , Dublin's fiery guitar quartet , have been dropped by Polydor after three years on the label . 

  The band , who were snapped up on the strength of their " Little Pieces Of God " EP released on the indie Setanta label , issued six singles and two albums with Polydor . 

  Rumours of other major changes surround the label . 

  There have been several redundancies in the press and promotions department and former Undertones vocalist Feargal Sharkey has also been recruited to the company's A&amp;amp;R section . 

  A spokesperson for Polydor , however , denied that Power Of Dreams' exit was the cue for a major clear-out at the label . 

  HUNDREDS OF heavy metal fans were left stranded at Derby Station last Saturday when British Rail failed to run the usual special train to London after the massive Donington Monsters of Rock festival . 

  Advertised in the national press and mentioned on Radio 1 , the service was to run at 12.15am , but on arrival at the station fans were told that BR had decided not to schedule the train this year and denied advertising the service . 

  Several hundred fans , already cold from intermittent rain , slept in the station overnight . 

  An unofficial BR source told NME that " The train is usually so full that it was considered too dangerous to run it this year . " 

  BUFFALO TOM , THOUSAND YARD STARE and SKAW are confirmed to appear at the final night of NME's Viva Eight gigs . 

  One top name special guest band has yet to be announced , completing the line-up at . 

  STOP PRESS ! 

  KURT COBAIN and COURTNEY LOVE have become parents . 

  Love gave birth to the couple's first child , a daughter , named Frances Bean last week . 

  The child was born three weeks premature , but is believed to be in good health . 

  Meanwhile , the band's cancelled homecoming gig at Seattle Coliseum ( see facing page ) has been rescheduled for September . 

  News that the band have shifted the Seattle date until after their Reading Festival appearance , lends credence to rumours suggesting that the home town show may well be Nirvana's last . 

  See feature , page 14 . 

  Madonna's Maverick menu 

  MADONNA is set to issue a new single , album and book , featuring some of her most controversial work to date . 

  The LP , titled " Erotica " , includes nine tracks written and produced in collaboration with Shep Pettibone , and three songs written and produced entirely independently . 

  Sources claim that material on the new LP , due in October through Madonna's own Maverick label , is a progression on the " Justify My Love " theme . 

  The first single from the new LP is scheduled for release in late September , and follows Madonna's recent hit 45 " This Used To Be My Playground " , which will not feature on the LP . 

  " Playground " was written specifically for the movie In A League Of Their Own starring Geena Davis , Tom Hanks and Madonna which premieres in the UK in September , and is said to be unrepresentative of the material featured on the " Erotica " LP . 

  Meanwhile , a new book compiled by Madonna , and titled Sex is published by Maverick in September . 

  Madonna : fully booked 

  Sugar : coming to your Lo-Cal-ity 

  SUGAR , whose debut 45 " Changes " is currently topping the NME Indie singles chart , release their LP " Copper Blue " in two weeks -- and have already finished writing a follow-up ! 

  A spokesperson for the band confirmed that the new material is more extreme than " Copper Blue " , signalling a return to Bob Mould's musical roots with Hsker D . 

  " Copper Blue " , meanwhile , is released on September 7 and features nine tracks including " Changes " , live favourite " Helpless " and a new version of " If I Cannot Change Your Mind " . 

  Following the power trio's acclaimed brace of London shows last month , they embark on their first national tour which calls in at . 

  Illinois outfit The Poster Children are rumoured to be supporting the band on all dates , although there was no official confirmation as NME went to press . 

  " Copper " bottomed rock : catch a Mouldy old show 

  " Upset " Kurt pulls Seattle concert 

  NIRVANA made a shock 11th hour decision to cancel a major home-coming show in Seattle last Sunday . 

  The sold-out concert was scheduled to take place at Seattle's 15,000 capacity Coliseum , however , Nirvana are believed to have pulled out because Kurt Cobain was furious over an interview which appeared in Vanity Fair magazine which revealed that he and his wife Courtney Love had indulged in a drug " binge " while Courtney was pregnant ( see last week's NME ) . 

  Inside sources claim that Cobain is devastated by the revelations , and the possibility that Nirvana may cancel their appearance at Reading Festival is very real , given that the band were prepared to scrap their jubilant homecoming show at just a few days' notice . 

  Rumours circulating in the UK last week , suggesting that Nirvana had planned to play with an extra guitarist at Reading , were hotly denied by a spokesman for the band . 

  Meanwhile , Nirvana's highly acclaimed debut LP " Bleach " is reissued through Geffen on September 1 . 

  Cassette formats feature one extra track " Big Cheese " , originally featured on the B-side of the band's debut single " Love Buzz " . 

  CDs also carry " Downer " , an extra track on the original Sub Pop American CD format of " Bleach " . 

  Nirvana are also believed to be working on cover versions of several seminal punk tracks for possible future release . 

  " I need this like a Hole in the head . " 

  Orb lead Hawkwind revival ! 

  THE ORB are planning to re-record a cover of the progressive rock classic " Silver Machine " with original artists Hawkwind ! 

  Alex Paterson and Thrash are said to have approached Hawkwind with a view to updating the song , which was a Top Five hit in 1972 . 

  Their previous collaborations include work with prog-rock idol Steve Hillage on various Orb projects and with the offshoot-band System 7 . 

  Meanwhile , The Orb have announced a 16-date tour for the autumn , including a marathon all-nighter at London's Brixton Academy . 

  They play . 

  Support on all dates will be provided by DJ Lewis and a host of other guests , yet to be announced . 

  Levelling the Bjelland 

  BABES IN TOYLAND have announced , exclusively to NME , their biggest ever UK tour and a new single . 

  The Minneapolis trio are set to lift " Bruise Violet " , the opening track from their highly acclaimed new " Fontanelle " LP . 

  The single will be issued through Southern in late September or early October . 

  All material derived from the " Fontanelle " sessions will be released in the UK by Southern , as a condition of the major deal agreed between the Babes and Warner/ Reprise . 

  The accompanying promo video for " Bruise Violet " was shot live at the legendary CBGB's club in New York City . 

  Meanwhile , the Babes' 11 major UK shows kick off at London Kentish Town &amp;amp; Country Club , and continue throughout September and early October at . 

  Polvo , the hotly tipped North Carolina-based unit whose debut LP " Cor -- Crane Secret " was produced by Max of Superchunk , support on all dates except Brighton . 

  " Violet " femmes , the Babes 

  SUEDE , who are on the verge of signing a major recording deal with Sony , have announced details of their second single and three September dates . 

  The single , " Metal Mickey " , follows the band's independent Number One debut " The Drowners " and is issued through Nude on September 14 , in addition to the title track , a lynchpin in the band's current live set , the single carries two exclusive tracks , " Where The Pigs Do not Fly " and " He's Dead " . 

  The band follow their appearance at the NME's Gim me Shelter gig last month with gigs at . 

  The Sony deal is part of a link-up between the major and Suede's current home , Nude , but will exclude the UK where the label is to remain independent . 

  US NEWS 

  DINOSAUR JR's J Mascis makes his movie debut in Gas , Food And Lodging , which opens in Britain on October 2 . 

  Mascis plays a rowdy party-goer in Alison Anders' semi-autobiographical story of life in a New Mexico trailer park . 

  He also composed the soundtrack with additional orchestration by Barry Adamson . 

  The movie stars Ione Skye and Donovan Leitch , both offspring of'60s popster Donovan . 

  MAMAS AND THE PAPAS vocalist John Phillips is recovering at the University Of California , Los Angeles Medical Centre from a recent liver transplant . 

  Phillips is reportedly in good condition and has renounced the drugs and alcohol that caused his cirrhosis . 

  ( Good move ! -- Ed ) 

  THE BLACK CROWES took time out from their sell-out " High As The Moon " tour to play a free concert to 75,000 fans in Toronto recently . 

  The show , at G Rose Lord Park , marked local radio station Q107's 15th anniversary . 

  JOHN MELLENCAMP had to cancel tour dates for the second time in a month when bass player Toby Meyers was injured in a boating accident in Saratoga , New York . 

  A loose rope wrapped itself around Meyers' foot , severing part of his big toe . 

  Last month , Mellencamp had to cancel shows in Detroit and Pittsburgh because of physical exhaustion . 

  MICHAEL JACKSON , MADONNA , THE BEATLES and ELVIS PRESLEY are among People magazine's recently published top ten teen idols of all time . 

  Other notable pop figures include Frank Sinatra , Ricky Nelson , David Cassidy and New Kids On The Block . 

  DENIS LEARY , the uncompromising comedian currently to be seen as an MTV link man , has signed a record deal with A&amp;amp;M . 

  Leary's series of soundbites for the channel led to a massed A&amp;amp;R scramble for his signature -- Def American , home of Andrew Dice Clay , was one of those who missed out . 

  Following the death of TOTO drummer Jeff Porcaro , a memorial fund has been set up to raise money for the Grant High School Music Department , where Porcaro and Toto members Steve Lukather and David Paich attended . 

  All donations should be sent to : . 

  THE PLATTERS' vocalist Tony Williams died in New York on August 14 , aged 64 . 

  From modest beginnings as car-park attendant in Los Angeles , he was groomed for stardom by legendary vocal arranger Buck Ram and earned 16 gold discs as a vital component in the most successful doo-wop group of all time . 

  Estimations of their total world sales hover around the 50,000,000 mark . 

  DREAD ZEPPELIN have replaced Tort Elvis with a new lead singer called Garry Bibb . 

  A record company spokesman said : " The American public had voted for a younger Elvis to grace their postage stamps and we took the hint . " 

  Their forthcoming album , " It's Not Unusual " , features a guest appearance by Screamin' Jay Hawkins and a cover of Bachman-Turner Overdrive's " Takin' Care of Business " . 

  REM guitarist Peter Buck has recently been treading the boards with Kevin Kinney of Drivin'N' Cryin . 

  Kinney toured with Buck when he released his acoustic solo album " McDougal Street " . 

  THE CULT's Ian Astbury ( below ) will appear at the Red Dawn Festival , a three-day music event in Irvine , California planned for October . 

  Proceeds from the show will go to the American Indian College Fund , an organisation seeking to ensure native Americans have access to higher education . 

  Sampled Notes 

  THE FRANK AND WALTERS ( above ) have changed one venue on their forthcoming tour , moving from Edinburgh Marco's Leisure Centre to The Venue on September 25 . 

  The band have also cancelled two dates at Hull Tower Ballroom and Manchester University , and added six dates at . 

  NICK CAVE AND THE BAD SEEDS issue a new single , " I Had A Dream Joe " through Mute on Monday . 

  Limited edition seven inch formats feature a live version of the title track backed with " The Good Son " , also recorded live . 

  Twelve inch and CD carry the studio version of the title track featured on the highly acclaimed " Henry's Dream " LP , plus live renditions of " The Carny " , " The Mercy Seat " and " The Ship Song " . 

  THE FALL have announced one additional autumn date in Manchester at the Free Trade Hall on October 3 . 

  As previously announced , Mark E Smith and co appear at Manchester Ritz Ballroom on September 15 , with special guests I Ludicrous , Fungus and Fabulous . 

  Tickets , priced 7.50 at the Ritz and 7.50 at the Free Trade Hall , are available from usual agents . 

  PAVEMENT have cancelled their show at Cambridge Junction , due to a double booking at the venue . 

  INSPIRAL CARPETS issue a new single , " Generations " , through Mute on September 7 . 

  The track serves as a taster from the forthcoming new " Pascal Gabriel " LP , which the band claim is " harder and more guitar oriented " . 

  Fortran 5 provide the flipside remixes . 

  THE STEREO MCs are set to issue a new single and LP through 4th &amp;amp; Broadway/ Island . 

  The single , " Connected " , is released on September 7 , prior to the ground-breaking British rap outfit's third album , also titled " Connected " on October 5 . 

  UK dates are expected to be announced shortly . 

  EAT are set to play a sequence of warm-up dates before Reading Festival . 

  The Camden-based five-piece appear under the pseudonym The Golden Eggs at and London Marquee supporting Power Of Dreams . 

  Eat also appear at London Kentish Town Town &amp;amp; Country Club with Kingmaker and Gallon Drunk as part of NME's " Viva Eight " extravaganza on Sept 2 . 

  THAT PETROL EMOTION , recently dropped by Virgin , make their first live appearances next month since finishing their new LP . 

  They play . 

  DAISY CHAINSAW have announced details of their keenly anticipated debut album . 

  The 12-track " Eleventeen " features the band's two hit singles " Love Your Money " and " Pink Flower " , and is issued through Deva/ One Little Indian in late September . 

  An extensive autumn tour of the UK is also scheduled . 

  SPIRITUALIZED follow their " Lazer Guided Melodies " tour last spring with a string of dates at . 

  Miranda Sex Garden support on all dates and a major London show is expected to be announced shortly . 

  MARC BOLAN is the subject of a new book published to commemorate the 15th anniversary of his death . 

  Wilderness Of The Mind -- Marc Bolan was compiled by long term fans John Williams and Caron Thomas , and chronicles the more obscure details and little known facts about his life . 

  The book features handwritten Bolan manuscripts , poetry , lyrics and drawings , plus many rare photographs . 

  Bolan's former managers , and members of his first band John's Children give exclusive interviews , and Morrissey contributes a personal account of what Bolan meant to him . 

  The book , available in paperback and limited edition hardback , is published by Xanadu on September 16 . 

  THE WEDDING PRESENT release their ninth single of'92 on September 7 and have announced details of their first major UK tour in 18 months . 

  " Loveslave " is backed by a cover of David Bowie's " Chant Of The Ever Circling Skeletal Family " , taken from his 1974 LP " Diamond Dogs " . 

  They play . 

  RECORD NEWS 

  45s 

  THE DARLING BUDS : " Sure Thing " Stephen Street-produced teaser from the band's new LP " Erotica " issued to coincide with September dates as special guests of Kitchens Of Distinction 

  DEF LEPPARD : " Have You Ever Needed Someone So Bad " primp metal unit take a third single from their recent " Adrenalize " LP , to follow their Top 40 hit " Make Love Like A Man " 

  DEL AMITRI : " Just Like A Man " sideburn fascinated MOR troupe lift another track from their Top Three " Change Everything " LP to follow the " Always The Last To Know " 45 

  DIESEL PARK WEST : " God Only Knows " MOR rendition of Brian Wilson's classic , backed with ten additional cover versions on four individual formats 

  TONY HADLEY : " For Your Blue Eyes Only " former Spandau Ballet leader lifts a taster from his forthcoming solo LP , " The State Of Play " , backed with one exclusive track " Tonight " 

  HARPAQUE : " Touchdown " bizarre ambient house work-out featuring classically trained harpist Kate Croke in collaboration with New Order bass player Peter Hook 

  THE HIGH : " Better Left Untold " Manchester baggy troupe hook up with former Cult producer Steve Brown , issued prior to a new LP next month 

  INXS : " Baby Do not Cry " second cut from the band's Number One album " Welcome To Wherever You Are " , recorded in Sydney , Australia with a 60-piece orchestra 

  ONE DOVE : " Transient Truth " Glasgow-based dub fascinated three-piece follow their NME Vibes SOTW " Fallen " with an Andrew Weatherall-produced taster from their forthcoming debut LP 

  CE CE PENISTON : " Crazy Love " dance diva lifts a fourth shrill single from her gold-selling debut LP " Finally " , available on four formats in six different remixed forms 

  ROLLINS BAND : " Tearing " lifted from the former Black Flag leader's " End Of Silence " LP , backed with " Earache In My Eye " recorded live in Sydney , Australia in 1990 

  SONIA : " Boogie Nights " cheeky flame-haired Scouser covers the 1977 Top Five disco smash for Heatwave 

  THE SUGARCUBES : " Vitamin " loopy Icelanders follow their two Top 40 singles " Hit " and " Walkabout " -- eight remixes of the track are featured on the CD format 

  THE THE : " Cold Spell Ahead " reissue of Matt Johnson and co's first ever single , originally recorded in'81 and deleted after the initial pressing of 2,000 

  JAN WOBBLE'S INVADERS OF THE HEART : " Ungodly Kingdom " a radical remix from the highly acclaimed " Rising Above Bedlam " LPP , backed with three previously unreleased tracks including " Josey Walsh " featuring lead vocals by Sinead O'Connor 

  RONNIE WOOD : " Show Me " Rolling Stones guitarist's first solo single in a decade 

  YELLO : " Jungle Bill " experimental electro duo collaborate with Andrew Weatherall 

  phrases out now , out Monday etc omitted below 

  LPs 

  ROBERT CRAY : " I Was Warned " contemporary blues guitarist follows his acclaimed " Midnight Stroll " album , with a new LP to coincide with a major European tour as special guest of BB King 

  BONEY M : " The Collection " mid-priced 11-track " Best Of " compilation of the camp disco legends finest moments , including " Rivers of Babylon " , " Daddy Cool " and " Brown Girl In The Ring " 

  GEORGE CLINTON : " George Clinton Family Series -- Volume 1 " the first in a series of compilations collecting previously unreleased archive material by the Godfather of superfunk , featuring nine tracks and a 12-minute interview 

  EPMD : " Business Never Personal " fourth album by the enduring East Coast rap outfit 

  THE FOURMOST : " The Best Of The EMI Years " digitally remastered 32-track compilation of the'60s Merseybeat group's material , including three previously unreleased tracks 

  HUE AND CRY : " Truth And Love " Glaswegian sophisto-pop duo's debut for their own label , featuring two recent singles " Profoundly Yours " and " In Between " , plus a cover of Stevie Wonder's " That Girl " 

  LONDONBEAT : " Harmony " third long-playing pop work-out , featuring cameo appearances by 

  LOOSE ENDS : " Magic Touch " Gang Starr , PM Dawn , Frankie Knuckles and Sly &amp;amp; Robbie remix the revered British black soul group's greatest hits , in celebration of their tenth anniversary 

  BAABA MAAL : " Lam Toro " Senegalese singer/ composer offers a mix of traditional acoustic and electric tracks , co-produced by Simon Booth 

  LOU REED : " The Bells " / " Growing Up In Public " mid-priced reissues of the former Velvet Underground leader's'79 and'80 LPs on CD for the first time 

  SHINEHEAD : " Sidewalk University " ragga/ rap pioneers' rough edged third LP produced by Bobby Konders , Dave Hall and Beats International's Norman Cook and featuring a cover of Paul McCartney's " Let " Em In " 

  TAKE THAT : " Take That And Party " Brit equivalent of New Kids offer their 12-track debut , featuring two Top 20 singles , " It Only Takes A Minute " and " I Found Heaven " 

  THUNDER : " Laughing On Judgement Day " Brit hard rock unit follow their Top 30 single " Low Life In High Places " with a new 14-tracker 

  UGLY KID JOE : " America's Least Wanted " flyweight US rockers issue a 13-track debut LP to follow the freak smash hit " As Ugly As They Wan na Be " 

  VARIOUS : " Trance Dance " 18-track mainstream dance compilation featuring contributions by The Shamen , Snap , The Future Sound Of London and Alison Limerick 

  VARIOUS : " White Sands " soundtrack from the forthcoming Mickey Rourke and Willem Dafoe movie about illicit arms dealings , featuring contributions by Little Feat and Dwight Yoakam 

  THE SHAMEN : " Ebeneezer Goode " a second track taken from the forthcoming " Boss Drum " LP , to chase their Top Ten single " LSI " . 

  Twelve-inch and CD formats feature Jack Dangers , Beatmaster and Evil Eddie Richards remixes -- out now 

  LEMONHEADS : " Hate Your Friends " / " Lick " reissue of the " Heads " first and third albums , their 1987 debut cut to include the band's first ever seven-inch " Laughing All The Way To The Cleaners " , their cover of " Amazing Grace " and four previously unreleased tracks . 

  " Lick " features their cover of Suzanne Vega's " Luka " , a version of Patsy Cline's " Strange " and a track from their first recording session , " Mad " -- out now 

  TOUR NEWS 

  ALICE DONUT , New York based indie faves on Alternative Tentacles , plug tracks from their forthcoming LP , " The Untidy Suicides Of Your Degenerate Children at 

  BIVOUAC , acclaimed Derby trio , play Cambridge Junction with Leatherface tonight 

  LUKA BLOOM , inventive Irish folk singer/ songwriter whose repertoire includes a cover of LL Cool J's " I Need Love " , plays two shows at London's Harlesden Mean Fiddler on August 26 and 27 . 

  CARMEL , acclaimed jazzy trio who issue their new single " You're All I Need " next Monday , play a one-off show at London's Victoria Palace Theatre on September 6 . 

  CREAMING JESUS , HEADCLEANER , FOREHEADS IN A FISHTANK appear at an Anti-Racist-Action benefit show at London's Powerhaus on August 27 , tickets priced 4 each . 

  DIVERSION , described as a cross between early Stranglers , Wire and Magazine , play 

  EXTREME , multi-million selling Boston rockers , appear at 

  GALLIANO , laid-back Talkin' Loud jazzniks , have announced details of a winter tour visiting Glasgow Tunnel 

  THE GODFATHERS , fresh from their public mauling of The Rockingbirds at Stansted Airport , play 

  THE HIGH , moody Mancunian outfit whose new single " Better Left Untold " is out now through London next Monday , play 

  ABDULLAH IBRAHIM , legendary US jazz-pianist , appears at Oxford Playhouse on September 13 . 

  KEROSENE , fierce guitar quintet recently snapped up by the Dead Dead Good label , take time out from recording their debut EP with Neds/ MC4 producer Jessica Corcoran to play Colchester Hippodrome on September 14 . 

  KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION , Tooting Broadway's finest , who issue their " When In Heaven " / " Glittery Dust " 45 on One Little Indian in two weeks' time , play 

  LEATHERFACE , venomous thrash trio enjoying indie Top Five success with their " Compact And Bijou " EP , 

  LUDICROUS LOLLIPOPS , adrenalin-fuelled indie guitar folk , precede the recording of their next Damaged Goods 45 with a clutch of dates at Coventry General Wolfe tonight . 

  LOVECRAFT , multi-cultural female " rawk " band based in London , play 

  PRAYER BOAT , rootsy Irish quartet and former support band with The Pogues , play 

  RADIOHEAD , Pixies-influenced home counties outfit , precede the release of their " Creep " EP with dates at 

  RUPTURED DOG , bastard-metal band , play 

  SHONEN KNIFE have been forced to postpone their UK dates due to touring commitments in their native Japan , but have managed to reschedule one gig at London's Clapham Grand on September 3 . 

  THE SKATALITES , legendary Jamaican ska outfit , play their first UK gig in 12 years at London's Finsbury Park George Robey on August 28 . 

  SPEAR OF DESTINY , recently reborn fiery rock outfit of the'80s , play 

  STRANGELOVE , Bristol-based indie guitar folk featuring ex-Blue Aeroplanes guitarist Alex Lee , play London's New Cross Venue tonight . 

  SULTANS OF PING FC embark on a marathon UK tour calling at 

  UNREST , whose " Imperial FFRR " album is out now on 4AD offshoot Guernica , play London Marquee tonight , 

  PAUL WELLER , whose long-awaited eponymous solo LP hits the shops on Monday , follows his recent string of US shows with a British tour this autumn calling at 

  BACK TO THE PLANET , loose-limbed groovers currently being courted by legions of A&amp;amp;R folk , play 

  ON ON ON 

  EDITED BY STEVE LAMACQ 

  Come on indie rock ! 

  Welcome the next generation of honest electric white boy blues in the form of SEBADOH ! 

  Emotive grunge-pop ahoy -- meet lyrically pained Newcastle foursome RAZORBLADE SMILE ! 

  GILLETTE'EM HAVE IT ! 

  RAZORBLADE SMILE are masters of juxtaposition -- both angelic and sinister -- they're the kind of band who would baptise a newborn child in pig's blood . 

  " We're aiming for that contradiction , " explains Jim James , one of the band's two singing guitarists . 

  " We do not want to be a painfully clichd screaming and shouting band , we want tension but we want it to be a duel thing , two complete opposites fighting against each other wish us cutting through the middle . 

  You get an element of pain in our lyrics and I do not believe we have to scream to get that across . " 

  The Newcastle foursome formed in mid-1990 , a product of college tedium . 

  Jim , along with singing partner Pete Lofty , drummer Chris Scott and bassist Dave Chary , grew tired of the make-it-big-quick policy adopted by the majority of British indie labels . 

  Earlier this year they released their awesome debut single " This Accurate Pain " through Chocolate Narcotic ( a friend's label ) and distributed it , largely , themselves . 

  Vowing never to cut corners , they've mastered their spliced-up , emotive grunge-pop without haggling with The Man . 

  " They seem to have a better idea of the indie ethic in America , " muses Jim . 

  " They do things for the fell of it and not for some kind of career motive . 

  Most of the smaller bands put out seven-inch singles themselves , whereas here everyone wants to be the next big thing and I hate all that . " 

  By rights , Razorblade Smile could easily be the Next Big Thing . 

  With American Hardcore tightening the grip on current musical trends -- and the Brits struggling to withstand the pace -- the Smile race in from behind like sprinters at a Strollathon . 

  Sounding like a variation of Buffalo Tom , the Pixies and Sebadoh ( with hints of The Cure , Teenage Fanclub and Can ) , they've fused agonised tunes with fey and angst-riddled melodies . 

  " We do go for a certain amount of fragility . 

  We like the vocals to be both timid and cutting , " whimpers Peter . 

  " But we also like to get the dynamics right ... and I cannot really sing any other way . " 

  One of the Smile's best tracks is " Elbow " , in which Pete sings powerfully evocative lyrics over hushed sections of a deceptively furious song . 

  " I am very self-conscious of my lyrics , " he reflects . 

  " I feel really nervous when I sing that one because it's a risk . 

  It's supposed to sound powerfully effective and menacing , as you said in the live review , like the theme tune to a serial killer . " 

  " I like the idea of surprising people , " snaps Jim . 

  " We want to intimidate the audience but also make them feel with us . 

  Basically , " he states in a conclusive tone , " we do not want to be obvious . " 

  Merely obviously wonderful . 

  The sinister yet angelic Razorblade Smile 

  SUMMERTIME LOU'S 

  OK , so you're still a little fazed by all this post-whatever US noise-grunge-new-wave-of-alternative-corporate-underground-anarcho-core-punk malarkey . 

  Indeed , you've been afraid to hold up your end of a rockin' conversation , paralysed by the knowledge that you alone do not possess the second Squirrel Bait album -- and worse , you do not even know why you should possess any Squirrel Bait albums , let alone the second one . 

  Fear not ! 

  Help is at hand , via the opening track of SEBADOH's new " Rocking The Forest " mini-LP . 

  " Gimmie Indie Rock " neatly traces the lineage of the American alternative , from the VU and The Stooges to hardcore and then Sonic Youth , Pussy Galore , Dinosaur and Hsker D . 

  " It's the next generation of electric white boy blues/ Come on indie rock ! " yells Seb's Lou Barlow over a hilariously generic sludge-out . 

  Lou ought to know . 

  For four years he pummelled bass with the Dino dudes before splitting in the summer of'89 , thoroughly alienated by J Mascis " autocratic tendencies and the band's impending major status . 

  He retreated into Sebadoh , releasing two albums of lo-fi acoustic introspection with help from drummer Eric Gaffney , a fellow veteran of the Massachusetts hardcore scene . 

  Then , joined by Jason Lowenstein , another drummer who also played bass and guitar , Sebadoh released " Gimmie Indie Rock " as a single of Homestead last year . 

  Atypical of their material thus far , it also hinted at Barlow's imminent return from the backwoods . 

  " It was totally laying out the future of Sebadoh , " Lou confirms . 

  " They got what they wanted , maybe Ii can get what I want too " " -- let us go electric . 

  All that stuff on our first two records I think is really cool and in some ways I prefer it to what we're doing now , and I knew that once we took any of those songs and put them in an electric context people would go , " Duh , it's a good song ! " . 

  I knew once we started playing electrically we would not be confusing the journalists and they would not think it was just some guy from Dinosaur masturbating in his room . 

  In a way I wish we had not re-released that song because it's not that strong . 

  I think it's kinda funny , it's good for about two listens . " 

  Despite the fact that both Eric and Jason contribute songs -- on the sprawling 23-track " Sebadoh III " album they share roughly half the groove space between them -- this current electric Sebadoh set-up looks organised primarily to suit Barlow's brutally poignant , heart-snaring laments , of which he has an apparently endless supply . 

  Songs like " Brand New Love " and " Its So Hard To Fall In Love " -- covered much to Lou's flattered bewilderment by Superchunk -- and newer material that will appear on the next full-length Sebadoh LP , to be released in the new year by Sub Pop and Roughneck , are typical of his style : eschewing traditional songwriting imagery and devices in favour of pure , honest expression . 

  " When I was in Dinosaur I never though I had any real talent . 

  I was writing the same songs with the same approach but I thought they were all shit so I never brought them to J or I never tried to play them . 

  When I realised there was nothing else to do in the world but write my own songs and play , that's when I brought them out and did them . 

  And all of a sudden everyone's saying , " Oh my God , they're so honest ! 

  Are not you embarrassed ? " 

  No ! 

  I thought this is how everybody writes songs ! " 

  Forget Squirrel Bait , mate -- here's Sebadoh 

  THRILLS 

  EDITED BY STUART MACONIE 

  " BIG MOUTH " 

  Lemmy : no sleep'til Bradford 

  " Locate to Bradford ? 

  You've got more chance of a wank off the Pope . 

  There ai n't no palm trees in Bradford , apart from the lobby of King George's Hall . " 

  Lemmy 

  " If when I am 38 , Metallica ends , I do not think I shall have the energy to start anther project . " 

  Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich 

  " I used to squeeze my spots but my step-sister used to love to do it . 

  Every time I got a spot it was like " Give me it here " . " 

  Cicero 

  " I woke up in the middle of the night . 

  I was naked , so I put on sunglasses and a Led Zeppelin record and I did a little Zeppelin dance . " 

  Anthony Kiedis of Red Hot Chili Peppers 

  " I'd do those clubs where they served chicken in a basket . 

  Trouble was , by the time I came on , they'd finished their chickens and were eating the baskets . " 

  Phil Cool 

  " My father would make me stand up straight and sing the national anthem four times . 

  Then we'd sit down and eat air meals to practise handling silverware or practise " seating the lady " . 

  I have impeccable table manners . " 

  Henry Rollins 

  Yo ! 

  Pass the cream crackers and cooking sherry ! 

  Introducing a new Thrills series which , frankly , has not got a lot of mileage in it . 

  MIKE LEIGH'S DO THE RIGHT THING 

  ( SCENE : A suburban lounge full of MFI furniture , Demis Roussos albums and rotisseries . 

  ALISON STEADMAN is putting Twiglets into little bowls while FLAVOR FLAV attempts to detach the kitchen clock from the wall ) 

  ALISON : 

  Leave that clock alone ! 

  Come and help me with the crisps . 

  ( The doorbell rings ) 

  ALISON : 

  Oh no ! 

  What time is it ? 

  ( Flavour looks at her oddly . 

  He opens the door and JIM BROADBENT -- the glum one who's always in Alan Bennett plays and Wood &amp;amp; Walters -- comes in with his wife , ICE-T ) 

  JIM : 

  Hallo , everyone . 

  Goodness , what attractive curtains . 

  Dralon , are they ? 

  ICE-T : 

  Shut up ! 

  Where's the sounds ? 

  ( He discovers the Demis Roussos albums ) Fly ! 

  Demis Roussos ! 

  That bitch can pump my dice ! 

  ALISON : 

  Would you like to dance with me ? 

  I seem to have become rapidly drunk on some sort of embarrassing lower-middle class drink like Bacardi and blackcurrant -- thereby leaving myself open to mockery from clever left-wing improvisation playwrights . 

  FLAV : 

  Hey ! 

  The bitch is embarrassing me in front of the neighbours . 

  ICE-T : 

  ( waltzing with Alison to the Demis Roussos record ) Forevahhh and evvah and evvah and evvahh , I NEEEEEEDDDD your love ... 

  ( Alison hugs Ice-T's medallion suggestively ) 

  ALISON : 

  I am so bored . 

  All I ever do when my husband is at work is sit at home and watch children's television . 

  ICE-T : 

  I am the same , myself . 

  I am obsessed with Rainbow . 

  In fact , you might say I've got ... 

  Bungle Fever ! 

  FLAV : 

  Er , I think the party next door is getting a bit loud . 

  JIM : 

  Yo ! 

  In fact , you might say there's ... noise N the'hood ! 

  ( Everybody looks at him ) 

  JIM : 

  Er ... 

  I shall just nip out and see what's going on . 

  ALISON : 

  It's that Dee who's having the party . 

  She's probably upset because her boyfriend does not want to go out with her on account of her amusing adenoidal accent . 

  FLAV : 

  Oh no ! 

  Does that mean her boyfriend is going to be ... 

  Chuck Dee ! 

  ( Enter DERRICK GUYLER dressed as a policemen like in Sykes , ie the brilliant TV series starring Eric Sykes and Hattie Jacques ) 

  DERRICK GUYLER : 

  How do ! 

  What's all this noise then ? 

  ICE-T : 

  The pigs ! 

  The pigs ! 

  You will never take me alive , copper ! 

  ( Suddenly he has a heart attack ) 

  FLAVOR FLAV : 

  Yo ! 

  More vol-au-vents for me ! 

  Yummo ! 

  ( The End . 

  Followed by the best bit ie the muffled thump of The Jam's " All Around The World " playing over the credits ) 

  No more English ! 

  No more French ! 

  No more sitting on the old school bench ! 

  It's ... 

  PROFESSOR ENO'S POP SCHOOL ! 

  ( SCENE : a sports field . 

  Clad in singlet , rubber plimmies and with a whistle on a string around his neck , PROFESSOR ENO is taking Games . 

  On the touchline the class jump up and down and look cold , like in Kes ) 

  PROF ENO : 

  Right , everyone ! 

  A brief warm-up and ... 

  Clint ! 

  Why have not you changed into your kit ? 

  CLINT : 

  The dog ate it , sir . 

  MIKI FROM LUSH : 

  He's lying , sir ! 

  I saw him flush it down the toilet so that no-one will laugh at his spotty chest in the showers ! 

  CLINT : 

  Yow blimmin' sneak ! 

  PROF ENO : 

  Run around the field for an hour , boy . 

  On the double ! 

  Now ... 

  You boy ! 

  Axl Rose ! 

  What's that you've got there ? 

  AXL ROSE : 

  Mofugger ! 

  Asswiper ! 

  Dickcheese-pilot ! 

  PROF ENO : 

  Right ! 

  Do a thousand press-ups ! 

  Now ! 

  TONI HALLIDAY : 

  Please sir , Axl's doctor said we're to be nice to him because he comes from a broken home and he has to wear a kilt . 

  PROF ENO : 

  Very well . 

  Give me that piece of paper you were reading , Axl . 

  AXL : 

  No way ! 

  ( In a deft gesture , Professor Eno snatches the paper ) 

  ENO : 

  Aha ! 

  Did you write this , boy ? 

  PJ HARVEY : 

  Please sir ! 

  Axl cannot read or write . 

  ( giggles ) 

  AXL : 

  Shaddafuggup , bitch ! 

  ( He cries ) it was Ice-T what wrote it . 

  ICE-T : 

  Bastard ! 

  PROF ENO : 

  I see . 

  Well , let us have a look at what Ice-T has written . 

  ICE-T : 

  Please give it back to me , sir . 

  It's sort of personal . 

  KYLIE MINOGUE : 

  It's a love note ! 

  DANNII MINOGUE : 

  Ha ha ! 

  Who do you fancy then , Ice-T ? 

  ICE-T : 

  Shut up ! 

  It is not a love note ! 

  L7 : 

  Ice-T is a girl ! 

  Ice-T is a girl ! 

  Ha Ha Ha ! 

  PROF ENO : 

  That's enough ! 

  It does appear to be a poem , though . 

  Hmmm ... " time to die , you stupid bald git/ Your conceptual ambient albums do not mean shit/ Your teaching methods of meaning are bereft/ And Roxy Music were only good when you left . " 

  Is this about me , by any chance ? 

  ICE-T : 

  Yes , I mean , no ! 

  It's about ... 

  Erm ... it's about George Bush . 

  PROF ENO : 

  I see . 

  And is that why it's called " Teacher Killer " ? 

  ICE-T : 

  ( suddenly ) Yeah ! 

  We do not need no education ! 

  We do not need no thought control ! 

  AXL : 

  Right on ! 

  Seize the means of production ! 

  Stamp on his glasses ! 

  ( They pick up PROF ENO and throw him into the small drainage channel that runs alongside the playing field ) 

  CLINT POPPIE : 

  Can I stop running now , sir ? 

  " Exactly what is the subtext to " Teacher Killer " , boy ? " 

  THRILLS BELIEVE IT OR NOT ! 

  PJ HARVEY was " The Girl With The Blackboard And The Clown " in the classic'70s colour testcard . 

  Techno music is illegal on the Isle Of Man , where there is a warrant out for the arrest of many top stars including Kraftwerk , Joey Beltram , Inner City and , due to a technical error , Ned's Atomic Dustbin . 

  Since there is no letter " B " in Greek , Sophie B Hawkins is referred to as Sophie The Sausage Hawkins in that country . 

  Therese Bazar , one half of Dollar , now manages Smashing Pumpkins . 

  HOMES OF THE RICH &amp;amp; FAMOUS 

  WITH FLOYD GROSSMAN 

  ICE T'S COUNTRY COTTAGE AND TEA SHOP , LOS ANGELES 

  FOR SOMEONE whose music is as aggressive and uncompromising as Ice-T's , it comes as some surprise to discover that the rap superstar lives in a charming country cottage about ten miles from Los Angeles . 

  When he greets me at the door , he is still wearing an apron , after " helping out " in the attached tea shop which he runs " as a bit of a hobby " . 

  How long has he owned the tea shop ? 

  " I bought it about two years ago . 

  It helps me relax after a hard day's rapping about controversial political and social issues . 

  Of course , I am very committed to social change , but I leave all that behind me when I get back here . 

  Once I put the apron on ( which sports a large portrait of Malcolm X ) I am just an ordinary tea man . " 

  Did the much talked about LA riots affect business ? 

  " Yes . 

  Actually the tea shop benefited slightly , because we'd introduced a new line of rock cakes that week , and some rioters came round to buy them to throw at middle class people . " 

  Outside the house , there's a large pond full of water lilies and tropical fish . 

  The sound of bird song drifts down from the trees , and butterflies flutter through the still early evening air . 

  " This is where I wrote " Cop Killer " , " says my genial host . 

  " I wanted to write a thoughtful song about recent events , and it was important that I just did not leap right in with an immediate gut reaction . " 

  In the music room , which has its walls lined with framed gold records and death threats from fundamentalist religious groups , Ice-T tells me about his future plans . 

  " I heard Enya recently , and I'd like to work with her . 

  Although certainly not in a musical field . 

  Maybe she could come and help out in my tea shop . " 

  Speaking of which , the controversial rapper offers me another drink . 

  What'll I have ? 

  Iced tea , of course ! 

  MATERIAL WORLD 

  808 STATE 

  WHERE ARE YOU AND WHAT ARE THE VIBES LIKE ? 

  Graham : 

  In my living room with Judy the lodger and Bjork . 

  We've slammed in the lamb and we're waiting on the Yorkshire results . 

  It's 10.30 and we're listening to Earth , Wind And Fire . 

  I am Phillip Bailey and they're Maurice White . 

  Andrew : 

  In my studio getting pissed . 

  Darren : 

  I am on the conain ( What ? -- Ed ) and feeling sweet . 

  WHAT WAS THE LAST THING YOU ATE ? 

  G : 

  A smoked turkey and emmenthal butty with HP sauce for breakfast 

  A : 

  Supermalt ( non-alcoholic malt drink with Vitamin B ) 

  D : 

  Irn Bru 

  WHAT WAS THE LAST GOOD BOOK YOU READ ? 

  WHAT WAS THE LAST VIDEO YOU RENTED ? 

  FAVE POLITICAL FIGURE 

  WHAT TV SHOWS DO YOU TRY NOT TO MISS ? 

  D : 

  The bits in the middle 

  WHAT WAS THE FIRST RECORD YOU HEARD ? 

  WHAT SPORTS ARE YOU GOOD AT ? 

  G : 

  White water rapids canoe slalom , shooting 

  A : 

  Table Football , Armchair Athletics 

  D : 

  Every sport 

  WHICH PUBLIC FIGURES DO YOU MOST DESPISE ? 

  FAVE JOURNEYS 

  G : 

  Sperm to egg , Apollo 8 , Stairs to bed , Outta here . 

  Peace ! 

  A : 

  Over the Snake Pass to Sheffield at 110mph in Darren Mansell Partington's VW Beetle 

  D : 

  The journey to the next world 

  HOW TO DESTROY MORRISSEY'S CAREER IN TEN EASY STAGES 

  Following on from Morrissey's terse communication of last week , we , the NME , will now share with you our secret weapon . 

  1 ) 

  Spend the entire'80s extolling his genius on a weekly basis . 

  2 ) 

  Spend the immediate post-Smiths period saying how he was the talented one and would go on to great things . 

  3 ) 

  Rave about his first solo recordings . 

  4 ) 

  Make his records Single Of The Week on ten occasions . 

  5 ) 

  Give " Bona Drag " 8/ 10 

  6 ) 

  Give " Kill Uncle " 8/ 10 

  7 ) 

  Give " Your Arsenal " 7/ 10 

  8 ) 

  Put his Japanese holiday snaps on the cover . 

  9 ) 

  Accord him the honour of being on the front of the 40th birthday issue . 

  10 ) 

  Spend all our lives saying how fantastic he is . 

  That should do it . 

  Next Week : How We Sabotaged The Careers Of Carter , Primal Scream And The Wonder Stuff In Very Oblique Ways . 

  " BASTARDS ! " 

  IT TAKES A URINATION OF MILLIONS ... 

  - 1971 ... 

  Van Der Graaf Generator , Rory Gallagher , Genesis , Ralph McTell , Osibisa and , erm , Country Jug . 

  1992 ... 

  The wonder Stuff , Public Enemy , Disposable Heroes Of Hiphoprisy , Nick Cave , Manic Street Preachers , Ride , Mudhoney , Teenage Fanclub and , erm , Nirvana ... 

  In the 20 years since the National Jazz , Blues And Rock Festival relocated itself from sleepy London toff suburb , Richmond , to its present Thames Valley site , the Reading Festival has become the premier rock gig . 

  Glastonbury is the unmissable event , the grooviest vibe of the music year , but Reading is the heaviest bill , the most densely packed agglomeration of rawk bands and fans to be found anywhere . 

  It was not always so ; in its time , Reading has also been a hippy haven , a pub rock paddock , a new wave Jamboree and the worst heavy metal headbangers' ball imaginable . 

  This all reached a peak in 1988 when piss-filled cider bottles rained down the hapless likes of Meatloaf ( who ran away ) and Bonnie Tyler ( who did not ! ) . 

  Since then , it has enjoyed a much-needed facelift to become the hip and swinging indie ( generic overlay ) festival of the year . 

  Over the next four pages , our own walking , talking Reading Festival , KEITH CAMERON , raids the archives to present an affectionate look at two decades of open air guitar . 

  On page 13 , however , STUART " I am still taking Valium " MACONIE recounts the full horror of 1988 , the pivotal Reading that lead to the wonderment that awaits us this weekend . 

  The famous bottles-of-piss barrage at Reading'88 

  A field on the edge of the bland Thames Valley hub town of Reading . 

  It is mid-way through the afternoon of Friday August 23 and a band called Nirvana have just completed their allotted 40 minutes at the annual rock festival by throwing their equipment at each other . 

  The sun is burning , the crowd is going noisily mental and the security guards are looking anxious . 

  You want rock'n' roll ? 

  Hey , this is what it's all about . 

  A year later , and Nirvana will headline the 1992 Reading Festival , their staggering rise , post-Reading'91 , making them obvious contenders for the prestigious Sunday night slot . 

  Like many before them , the Seattle trio had used a lowly billing at the traditional August Bank Holiday beano from which to launch an assault on the cloth-ears and closed minds that run the pop establishment . 

  It's been a popular strategy ever since The Rolling Stones played the small marquee at the 1963 National Jazz Festival in Richmond -- the event that subsequently mutated into Reading -- and provoked scenes of hysteria as hundreds of excited youths abandoned the main arena and jostled to catch a whiff of this liberating new air , leaving a bewildered Acker Bilk tootling his way into the footnotes of history . 

  But despite Mick'n' Keef'n' more besides , and playing an important role in shaping Britain's nascent youth culture , it is but recently that Reading has once again become the only place for any self-respecting hep cat to pitch a tent during late August . 

  For much of the past two decades it was Square City , the quaint , eccentric and often decidedly sick man of rock . 

  BY THE time it actually became based in Reading in 1971 , the National Jazz , Blues &amp;amp; Rock Festival -- as it would soon be known -- had begun to epitomise all that was ominous about sitting on an ex-council rubbish tip amidst capricious weather and listening to the sound of the beat boom go bum . 

  Oh what joy , as the swing of the'60s gave way to the pong of the'70s , as flares creaked muddily in time to a trenchant progfolk-jazz-R&amp;amp;B soundtrack and the likes of Genesis , Rory Gallagher , Van Der Graaf Generator , Brewer's Droop and Greenslade became the staple Reading fare . 

  In 1974 , for instance , that mid-Friday afternoon slot was grabbed by workaday pub rockers Chilli Willi And The Red Hot Peppers , an outfit notable only for featuring future Attraction Pete Thomas on drums and a manager in Jake Riviera who would eventually found Stiff Records . 

  This tiny detail in Reading's long history somehow epitomises its allegiance with a seamy , downbeat , quintessentially British rock tradition and would logically result in its gradual submission to the horrors of wall-to-wall heavy metal , bottle-battles and snapshots of birds-wiv-their-jugs-aht in the programme . 

  " The Reading Festivals are well-organised , efficiently run , and good value for money . 

  These facts are indisputable . 

  The trouble is they are not events , they are not occasions , they are not exciting . 

  And , until ( the organisers ) can show a little more initiative in their booking policy , it will remain so . " 

  So ran the verdict of the NME way back in 1973 . 

  To explain precisely why it took until 1989 for the Reading Festival to haul itself back into something resembling the land of the living requires a closer look at the origins of this venerable institution . 

  Reading'92 will be the 30th open-air musical bash organised by Barbara and Harold Pendleton , and the 20th to be held in Reading . 

  Proprietors of the Marquee Club from its original late'50s berth beneath the Academy Cinema on Oxford Street until 19887 , apart from anything else the Pendletons thought it would be nice to gather their musician friends together for a weekend garden party , and so they staged the National Jazz Festival at Richmond Athletic Ground on August 26/ 27 , 1961 . 

  The star attractions included Chris Barber , Johnny Dankworth and the Clyde Valley Stompers , the St John's Ambulance dealt with 22 cases of wasp stings , there were no reported rucks between rival gangs of trad and modern jazz-heads , and the sun actually shone . 

  Like cool , daddio ! 

  " We did it just to book all the bands we knew , " recalls Barbara Pendleton at her office in the Festival's West London HQ . 

  " Turned out we knew everybody in the audience as well ! 

  Anyway , it was good fun , so we did it again the next year . 

  Eventually , it became established . 

  So far as we're concerned we started an event for music that was an alternative -- I did not want to listen to Vera Lynn . 

  It's changed over the years , but it's still for what I'd like to think of as the intelligent , discerning young music fan . " 

  1963 : the Stones play through some amplification borrowed from the back of a TV 

  1988 : Glastonbury has a pyramid stage ... 

  That the Pendletons' party ended up at Reading was down to a fair measure of fluke . 

  Throughout the'60s , the National festivals grew rapidly and were forced to become movable feasts due to constant licensing hassles -- Windsor in'66 and'67 , Kempton Park'68 , Plumpton'69 and'70 . 

  A regular pitch was sorely needed . 

  Meanwhile , Reading Council were lashing together a municipal PR exercise , using as a dodgy pretext the 400th anniversary of the destruction of the local abbey by Henry VIII . 

  With a month to put together a programme of events for this " Reading Festival " , things were not going well and the organisers approached London club owner Dave Bilk -- yep , Acker's bro -- who put them on to B &amp;amp; H. 

  " I remember there were ducks , swimming on the site ! " says Barbara . 

  " People said we were mad , it would never happen . 

  But of course it did , and in the end our event was the only one to make money for their thingy , and we stayed there . 

  We'd got a good relationship with the council . " 

  Not everyone in Reading was as grateful for this unlikely last minute salvation . 

  The drug squad launched a massive operation costing 17,000 and resulting in 112 arrests -- some made by " rozzers " disguised as hippies ! -- while the manager of the nearby Caversham Bridge Hotel barricaded his premises with 12-foot-high chain fencing . 

  " The hotel will be open for meals , " said Mr Paul Dogliani , " but pop fans who look like pop fans will not be served . " 

  But the festival returned the next year and gradually Reading grew to tolerate the pop fans . 

  Indeed , as administrator Myra Hickey points out , when the Labour council was elected in 1986 one of its manifesto commitments had been to bring back the festival which had been absent for the previous two years owing to the council reclaiming its original site . 

  " I am not saying they won because of that , but ... people are used to it , it's been there for 20 years . " 

  Election-winner or not , for much of the'80s , punters were voting with their feet and staying well away from Reading . 

  The early part of the decade had seen the festival succumb entirely to the boys' own heavy metal hackery that at that point ruled the roost in certain quarters , most significantly the mind of Jack Barrie , Marquee General Manager and responsible for booking the bands . 

  1982 was the definitive Reading ROCK festival : Budgie , Iron Maiden and Michael Schenker headlined with a supporting cast of such acned arseholes as Terraplane and Praying Mantis , and old stagers Blackfoot and Tygers Of Pan Tang . 

  The spirit of Chilli Willi was dutifully upheld by Wilko Johnson and Dave Edmunds , but these were lone voices of dissent . 

  The following year was billed as the last ever and saw Steel Pulse canned off after 15 minutes by a typically broad-minded Stranglers crowd and Black Sabbath playing in front of an unfinished replica of Stonehenge . 

  " It was too big for the stage , " remembers Myra . 

  " They were sawing it in half and heaving all these rocks around on the Saturday morning trying to make it look like anything other than a total abortion . 

  In the end we just let the audience in or we'd have been there all day . " 

  It gave Spinal Tap the inspiration for " Stonehenge " , but otherwise the Reading Festival must have barely registered beyond " laughing stock " status in the minds of Barbara's " intelligent , discerning " young music fans . 

  After farmer Desmond Drayton granted use of his fields adjoining the original site , it returned in'86 with a hurriedly assembled bill featuring The Mission , Killing Joke , FM , Saxon , New Model Army , It Bites and Hawkwind , only to confirm that Reading was suffering from a massive non-identity crisis . 

  That 1971 Genesis contract in full . 

  Another 20 in Phil's bin ! 

  1962 : Attention , hepcats ! 

  THIS IS NOT A JOKE ! 

  The press tent , 1971 ! 

  Babes in boyland 

  Above : what a load of rubbish ! 

  The Reading punters and their resultant detritus . 

  Inset , right : oh , how the design of those programme flyers improved over the years ! 

  The next year was worse : The Mission , Icicle Works , Fields Of The Nephilim and The Fall on Friday , Status Quo , Quireboys and Magnum on Saturday , and Zodiac Mindwarp , Alice Cooper , FM ( again ? ! ) and The Stranglers ( again ! ! ! ) to close . 

  Who the hell needed Reading ? 

  Metalheads had Donington , goths had the Electric Ballroom , Stranglers fans had each other and as for the rest , well , too bad . 

  Something had to give . 

  IT DIDN'T . 1988 is widely perceived as Reading's nadir , poorly attended and with a woefully average line-up , even by Reading's by now hopeless standards . 

  Iggy Pop and the lippily ascendant Wonder Stuff aside , the only high point was seeing the pathetic Meat Loaf take umbrage at the traditional hail of plastic bottles . 

  " Hey ! " frothed Fatso . 

  " Do you wan na rock'n' roll or do ya wan na throw shit ? ! " 

  " Throw shit ! " came the gleeful response . 

  After taking a direct hit on the right temple , Mr Loaf walked off and has not graced a British stage since . 

  He was not even headlining . 

  Starship were headlining . 

  The following week's press was hard but fair : Reading Festival -- A Joke ! 

  Official ! 

  Something gave . 

  Jake Barrie was relieved of his booking duties and the Mean Fiddler's Dave Phillips was offered the chance to revive the Pendletons' flagging garden party . 

  He succeeded by dint of the radical policy of booking bands that were vaguely contemporary , at least moderately interesting and which common sense along suggested would pull a respectable crowd . 

  The House Of Love , The Sugarcubes , New Order , The Pogues , Jesus Jones , Butthole Surfers ... 

  Suddenly Reading was the Glastonbury you could go to and still be able to catch the last train home . 

  " We knew we should change but we were too slow , " admits Barbara . 

  " What was disappointing about'88 was the audience . 

  I could not believe people could be so intolerant . " 

  Reading's renaissance was underpinned by the even greater success of'90 and'91 . 

  Indeed , after years of benign neglect , the job of booking acts for Reading became every promoter's dream . 

  Earlier this year the Mean Fiddler's Vince Power and the Pendleton organisation failed to reach agreement on negotiating a new three-year contract and Paul McAvoy , booking manager at the Marquee , got the nod instead . 

  " The Mean Fiddler " did a brilliant job , " says McAvoy . 

  " They turned Reading round after that debacle in'88 , and at the time I was very surprised that Vince did not accept the new contract because it's become such a prestigious event . 

  But he's had his own little campaign to rubbish it now , just because he has not got it any more . 

  I was at the Madness gig at Finsbury Park the other week and Vince had me removed from the premises ! 

  It's so childish of him -- any argument he's got is with the organisers , not me . " 

  Five years ago the prospect of music biz power-brokers scraping over the rights to the Reading Festival would have been laughable , but then five years ago Reading was laughable , light years removed from the vital , fun , rather homely popstravaganza it is today . 

  Future promoters should think well on that before choosing any dramatic alterations to its current make-up . 

  " The audiences are so young now , " says Myra , " lots of 16-year-olds . 

  The metal crowd were really quite ancient but now we've got a mum monitor who answers the phone and reassures all the mums that their little ones are going to be OK . " 

  " You will find the only people who complain are usually gentlemen with very little hair , " adds Barbara , herself a young-at-heart 57 , " and they're complaining about these young people with lots of hair ! 

  That's always been the case , it's only in recent years that young people have been allowed to go out and enjoy themselves . 

  In my day , you went to school , then you went to work . 

  And we rebelled against that , I suppose . " 

  I shall see you down the front . 

  THIS IS N'T A JOKE EITHER ! 

  Check those ID badges -- these cool dudes are the security ! 

  1988 again : The cool sophistication of John Hiatt is always a festival favourite 

  PISSED ... 

  OFF ! 

  I had every reason to look forward to the August Bank Holiday weekend of 1988 . 

  Still virginal in my dealings with the music press , I was to be despatched to the Reading Festival to cover this bastion of the British rock calendar for NME . 

  Strong drink and vibrant tunes in the open air , I stupidly thought . 

  How wrong I was . 

  The Reading Festival of 1988 was the worst music-related experience I have ever had , or ever expect to have . 

  It was a celebration of all that is ugly and pointless about pop culture ; flaccid , unimaginative , shallow , a lifestyle celebration for people without a lifestyle , a mundane parade of talentless cretins performing their laughable music for the amusement of the most appalling heap of detritus I've ever seen assembled in one place . 

  It was a nightmare from the word go . 

  That kind of damp , chill August day only Blighty can produce , a large , scrubby field , a bill that could make you weep it was so poor . 

  Contrary to popular belief , rock journalists are not only interested in backstage hospitality . 

  But , for reasons that will become clear , the backstage facilities at Reading'88 attained a special importance . 

  It was somewhere to hide and sob into your plastic glass of flat lager while all around , pondlife ran riot . 

  Backstage was misery . 

  Ageing HM clowns with bottle tans and painted on black jeans held court at the wretched bar surrounded by sagging , middle-aged groupies who'd made themselves up whilst drunk , it appeared . 

  " Comedian " Keith Allen was much in evidence in this company , he was a star of Kylie-esque proportions . 

  A handful of poxy tents sold greasy lentil pilaf to the worst kind of industry lackey . 

  Out front , it was even worse . 

  From the word go the crowd ( badly dressed , smelly , blank-faced and radiating tragedy ) greeted the bands with abuse and bottles of cider which they had feverishly pissed in . 

  There were some moments of grim humour . 

  Both The Quireboys and Bonnie Tyler ( See ! 

  F--ing top quality entertainment , eh kids ) took direct hits to the head and upper body which they tried to laugh off with some misplaced jokes . 

  Runrig played for 12 hours . 

  I got into a fight with a man whose IQ was so low , it took him ten minutes to say " press wanker " . 

  Modern parents encouraged their runtish children to start small fires and shit in the burger van queue . 

  Uriah Heep did not play any of their good songs . 

  Meat Loaf came on to a volley of missiles and for one , beautiful moment , it seemed he was going to get down from the stage and beat some arsehole to death . 

  Sadly , he did not . 

  He sloped off whining instead . 

  Finally , the local chapter of Hell's Angels invaded the site and the security fled . 

  I pleaded with Gripper and Skull to be allowed to join the chapter on a one-off basis but they refused . 

  Enraged , drunk , freezing and unutterably miserable I left to make the 200 mile trip home . 

  My subsequent review was severely edited by the then Live Ed Helen Mead . 

  With hindsight , she was right . 

  The stuff about " wretched human tampons " was a tad strong . 

  But the tone of hatred remained . 

  And the piece was all the better for it . 

  I am told that Reading is a different place now . 

  But , frankly , I do not have the stomach to find out . 

  Basically I had the wrong equipment at Reading'88 . 

  I took a notebook . 

  It should have been a flamethrower . 

  Tougher than the rest : Ms Tyler in'88 

  LOVE WILL TEAR US APART 

  As " Nevermind " zoomed past Bono and Jacko , so the rumours started : Kurt Is Dead ... 

  Kurt and Courtney and heroin ... 

  As the bulldozers continue to gather up the money , will NIRVANA survive the madness of mega-success ? 

  But more to the point , will they survive Courtney Love ? 

  KEITH CAMERON waits patiently for an audience and soon spots that all is not well in their domain . 

  15 minutes of frame : STEVE DOUBLE 

  Imagine a wedding without a bride and groom . 

  Or a banquet without the food , a candle without a flame , a film without a star . 

  A mother without a child . 

  It's not right -- it's not ready . 

  It cannot happen . 

  They are not here yet . 

  So , somewhere deep in the pristine recesses of Madrid's Velodrome , we have to wait . 

  And wait . 

  Hey , do not worry , we've got really good at waiting over the last couple of days . 

  Have a coffee , eat some food , do a little pacing up and down . 

  Oh yes -- waiting , we know how to do it . 

  There's a slight commotion in the distance and all eyes turn at once . 

  Here they come ! 

  She leads him by the hand , and from a distance they resemble those drawings of Christopher Robin dragging Winnie The Pooh along the ground . 

  As they get nearer , though , the vision fades . 

  Christopher Robin was never this female , never this pregnant , and Pooh never wore such a sappy grin or had a blood red lipstick welt on his right cheek . 

  She looks angry . 

  He looks cute . 

  Everyone else looks relieved . 

  Ladeeez an' gennullmen ... 

  I give you King Kurt and Queen Courtney , newly crowned monarchs of the former Republic of Nirvana . 

  Pray silence for Her Majesty ! 

  " Here he is ! " she shrieks . 

  " Here's everyone's little investment ! " 

  God , do not you just hate royalty and their bad jokes ? 

  I HAD N'T seen Nirvana since December'91 , when they'd played the Transmusicales Festival in Rennes , France . 

  It was the band's last date before cancelling the rest of their European tour due to Kurt Cobain's ravaged voice and , although messy in places , their performance still heaved with a sometimes dangerous , sometimes carefree sense of abandon , enough to be a vivid reminder of just why this band had meant more than any other for years . 

  In the dressing-room afterwards , all were exhausted . 

  Chris Novoselic rolled a cigarette with the deliberate , weary motions of a man three times his age , while Dave Grohl sat motionless for ten minutes with a towel over his head , every now and again moaning , " I think I am about to die " . 

  Kurt , however , was remarkably animate , clearly happy it was all over , and talked enthusiastically about how much he'd enjoyed touring with Shonen Knife and was now just looking forward to going home for a rest . 

  Considering his band had clocked up four months on a promotional treadmill that had become steeper and faster the more " Nevermind " sold , he looked in pretty good shape . 

  See you next year , Kurt . 

  He smiled . 

  " Sure . " 

  Next year turned this year , " Nevermind " zoomed past Jacko , Bono and Axl . 

  Nirvana did Saturday Night Live , the Rolling Stone front cover , landed the Reading Festival headline slot , the whole shebang , and suddenly ghoulish rumours concerning the health -- physical and otherwise -- of the frail genius at the centre of what was now the Nirvana Phenomenon started to become commonplace . 

  It got harder to laugh at the weekly brace of " Kurt Is Dead " stories when various credible sources were whispering about Cobain and partner Courtney Love doing heroin together , about them being completely out of it all at their wedding in Hawaii , about them going into detox and then quitting . 

  About how the band were on the verge of splitting up . 

  About Courtney doing junk while pregnant ... 

  As far as the tabloid music press were concerned , Nirvana were just too good to be true . 

  Rarely had the rollercoaster dynamic of rock'n' roll been so extreme -- unknowns shoot from nowhere to top of charts with incendiary musical formula . 

  The all-important twist ? 

  They did not even try ! 

  They do not want to be successful ! 

  Brilliant . 

  And now , with the accountants still hiring bulldozers to gather up the money , they've begun to blow it all via smack , the biggest sucker punch of the lot . 

  From nobodies to superstars to f--ups in the space of six months ? ! 

  That had to be a record . 

  Nirvana Inc battened down the hatches and made to ride out the storm . 

  It was business as usual . 

  The band were taking a break from each other , but they'd be working on some new material soon with a view to releasing a new song as a single to coincide with Reading . 

  Everything was fine , really it was . 

  During this rest period I interviewed Chris by telephone and asked him how the wedding of the year had gone . 

  " Oh , quiet . " 

  Masterful diplomacy . 

  Chris in fact had not been at the wedding , since Courtney had refused to let his wife Shelli attend . 

  Meanwhile , Kurt repeatedly and vehemently denied taking heroin . 

  As stonewalls go , this was all highly impressive . 

  Sure , the rumours continued , but while Nirvana were not actually doing anything it was not hard to dismiss this as nothing more than the idle tittle-tattle that was the inevitable lot of a multi-million selling rock band . 

  Then came the time to really pick up the slack once more . 

  A two week tour of Europe was organised for late-June/ July in order to make up for the shows cancelled at the end of last year . 

  After the gig at Belfast King's Hall , Kurt was rushed to hospital suffering from acute stomach pains . 

  " Ulcers , " sez Nirvana . 

  " Oh yeah , " yawns everyone else . 

  Could so much have changed in six months ? 

  Moving round the archways of Valencia's bull-ring where , that night , Nirvana would give Spain its first in-the-flesh taste of what this nonsense was all about , it was almost a relief to greet Kurt Cobain once again , a paler , bleached-haired , bespectacled Kurt Cobain , but recognisably the same lovable scruff who late last year turned rock'n' roll upside down with a song named after a deodorant . 

  Chris Novoselic ambled up to say " hi " and bemoan a chronic hangover -- the inevitable punishment for a late-night sesh with support band Teenage Fanclub -- and Dave Grohl soon emerged from down the rampway that led to the sun-baked arena , all smiles as ever . 

  Hmmm , I thought . 

  This does not seem so bad . 

  OK , so I've never seen Kurt look quite that pale before , and I am not sure it's such a good idea for Courtney to be zipping about with Kurt on that hired motorbike while seven months pregnant but , hell , it's not as if anyone's dead . 

  No-one is dead . 

  That much we can take away from this latest close encounter with planet Nirvana without fear of contradiction . 

  But death -- specifically heroin-induced -- has been a talking point amidst US underground circles recently . 

  During the New Music Seminar , NYC noise harbingers Unsane lost their drummer Charlie Ondras to an overdose , then the following week Stefanie Sargent from Seattle band Seven Year Bitch died in similar circumstances . 

  What year did you say it was ? 

  WE ARE SITTING in one of Nirvana's dressing rooms after the taming of the bullring . 

  By Nirvana's standards , it's been pretty lacklustre stuff , but the crowd did not seem to mind . 

  Kurt is showing me his glasses which , along with his new hairstyle , are supposed to enable him to walk down the street unrecognised . 

  I suggest that people will most likely stare at him anyway . 

  " You're probably right . " 

  Chris and Steve Double are talking cameras , the bassman's current pet hobby , while Dave dispenses beers and chats to Anton , Nirvana's UK press guy . 

  Courtney Love , meanwhile , is sounding off to anyone within earshot about Stefanie Sargent . 

  For the record , Courtney's current reading material is 12 Days On The Road , the recently published account of the Sex Pistols' fatal American tour . 

  " People say she was a junkie but how do they know that ? 

  I mean , I do not think if you do it once or twice it means you're hooked , that's not a junkie . 

  And if you have someone with you , too , that's good . 

  She was alone , though , you know that ? 

  Still , it's sooo rock . " 

  Spend two days in tour fatigues with this new , arena-compatible Nirvana production machine -- " I do not know the names of most of the crew , " admits Dave -- and it dawns on you that the overriding issue here is not that Kurt Cobain is on heroin ( or is not , or was , or is and is trying to get off ) but that his wife is a Grade A pain in the arse . 

  She seems to be almost universally disliked . 

  " The Wicked Witch Of The West , " is one crew member's assessment , while someone else refers to Kurt being a nice guy BC -- " Before Courtney " . 

  Any impression of calm and harmony is down to the fact that everyone close to the band has obviously passed the Krypton Factor -sponsored How To Tolerate Courtney test . 

  Chris and Shelli simply ignore her . 

  The irrepressible Dave alternates that approach with some impressive mimic routines . 

  During the Valencia show , Courtney is sitting on the stage , near Grohl's kit . 

  " Courtney ! " he screams in mock petulance , " Get the f-- off my stage ! " 

  It's just the sort of thing Courtney would say . 

  A recent addition to the Nirvana entourage is Janet Billig , who looked after Hole's affairs in her previous employ at Caroline Records . 

  Her role on this tour is like a cross between wet nurse and human sponge , indulging whims and soaking up all of Courtney's excess bullshit . 

  One of the reasons for her unpopularity could be because right now she -- and only she -- has the full confidence of Kurt Cobain , the man without whom Nirvana cannot function . 

  As demonstrated by their regal entrance prior to the Madrid show , Courtney is only too well aware of this . 

  For much of that day , everything is put on hold -- Nirvana's soundcheck , interviews , the NME picture session , Teenage Fanclub's soundcheck , everything -- because Kurt is not around , still holed up with the missus back at the hotel . 

  Anton repeatedly tries to speak to him but , on the one occasion when the phone gets picked up , Courtney yells " He's asleep ! " and slams it down again . 

  Eventually she lets Anton talk to Kurt , who seems unaware of all the fuss . 

  After four hours of waiting , Steve gets a 15 minute photo-shoot . 

  There is no Nirvana soundcheck . 

  The Fanclub's Gerry Love casts Nirvana's hassled tour manager Alex a sympathetic look . 

  " There is no way , " he states firmly , " we're ever gon na let it end up like this . " 

  WHETHER HEROIN is at the root of this unreliability I do not know for sure , nor am I about to proscribe the freedom -- or is that stupidity -- of anyone to take whatever substance they choose to take , be it alcohol , tobacco , heroin or carpet cleaner . 

  But the fact is that Courtney's dealing the hand of an unborn baby as well as her own . 

  The health of little Frances Bean Cobain is the X factor that elevates all this second-hand scandal into something a whole lot scarier , something much more important . 

  She does not have a choice . 

  The most recent scare story concerning Nirvana involves Courtney being admitted to hospital in Bilbao -- Nirvana's final port of call before heading back to the US -- having damaged her womb . 

  She is advised to stay there for five days but insists on going back with the band . 

  Then Kurt has to shell out a considerable amount of money , maybe $25,000 , for the first class plane seats so that Courtney can fly home lying down and a specially appointed ambulance to pick her up at LA airport . 

  OK , another story , another rumour , but who'd take the trouble to make this stuff up ? 

  This is serious shit , and it's no wonder some people are freaking out and saying reading will be it . 

  Game Over . 

  The End . 

  And all because this cool band sells a supertanker load of records ! 

  That's the disconcertingly prosaic truth of the matter . 

  In Spain , about the only times when things got put in this much perspective were when Nirvana were actually playing -- Madrid was still below-par , frenzy-wise , but a thrilling experience purely because the audience was so enthused by it all -- and when I finally interviewed Dave , Chris and Kurt . 

  Away from the panic , the waiting , the torn-up schedules , hell , it seemed almost like old times , almost normal . 

  " Petty tour drama can be an ordeal , " considers Dave . 

  " People have tantrums , people's tempers flare . 

  But I can block everything out . 

  I am not really an emotional person at all , just because I'd rather ignore emotion than confront it , so when it comes down to really heavy shit it kinda just breezes right by me . 

  I do not really want to get involved in anyone else's problems and I do not want to be the cause of anyone else's , so I just lay low . 

  I think maybe that's what'll keep me sane through this whole trip . " 

  What causes the madness ? 

  A Spanish fan reaches Nirvana ... 

  Nirvana reach a ( S ) pain in the ass 

  " Cute " Kurt onstage at the Madrid Velodrome : a man " unmoved by the experience of playing rock'n' roll " 

  " Just constant gratification is unhealthy for anybody , y'know ? 

  This is why you've got people like Michael Jackson and Axl Rose , Insane Rock Star A or B , because they're constantly being pampered . 

  I've tried to keep some level of consideration for everybody through this whole thing . 

  I do not like to have people do stuff for me . 

  I do not like to have runners to out and get me meals , I do not like to call down to room service and ask them to bring me up some cigarettes -- it's just not normal . 

  That's the kind of thing that will get to you and make a difference in eight months of being in a popular band with a lot of money . 

  It's gross . " 

  continued page 16 

  Dave's closest brush with a total gratification zone came when he met Bono on U2's recent American tour . 

  " F--in' asshole ! 

  It was such a bummer'cos when I was 13 I thought " War " was a great album ! 

  He reeks of rock-star-ness , he was not a human being . 

  He wanted us to open up for them on tour , and I said , " No , that's not what we're into " . 

  And he was saying , " You owe it to the audience , you've got to take that next step . " 

  And I said " I do not wan na take that next step ! " 

  He was desperately trying to make a connection . 

  " Do you like the blues ? " 

  " No . " 

  " Do you like gospel ? " 

  " Er , no , not really . " 

  " So what kind of music do you listen to ? " 

  " Punk f--in' rock , man ! " 

  And then of course he tells me about punk rock and he was there and he was the meaning of punk rock . 

  After meeting that guy it made me wan na give up being in a rock'n' roll band . " 

  Chris Novoselic reckons he's got his priorities sorted . 

  After this tour's finished , he's off to Croatia to see his family , who live in Zadar , about 250 miles up the coast from Dubrovnik . 

  " I try to have humility about things , just be for real . 

 'Cos all of this is fabricated . 

  People , they build these institutions like governments or rock bands or anything , and reality is distorted . 

  Some people are worried about eating and here we are off on this whole rock'n' roll circus . 

  I have to take it with a grain of salt . " 

  Has it changed the way you feel about Dave and Kurt ? 

  " No , it's pretty much the same as it always was , just pretty laid-back . 

  We spent some time away from each other just to do our own things , but now we're looking forward to getting back to how things were , lock ourselves away and work . 

  Our new record's just got ta sound different . 

  I've been on this big rant lately of how transition is natural , continental drift , the seasons , the weather's different every day , people grow older and change ... 

  When I think of " Nevermind " now I think of interviews and being famous . 

  Now I am focusing on this new record and not even considering anything that's happened , and maybe we can come out absolved . " 

  He laughs . 

  " I see this as such a rite of passage -- you get signed to a major , you get money , you go into the studio , a big 24-track hubbub , either it sells or it does not . 

  And ours sold , but that's all behind us now . 

  All the records we've sold have given us the power to do whatever we want . " 

  Is he worried about Kurt ? 

  " You hear all the rumours . 

  Just media bullshit . 

  You got ta have a good story . " 

  But there's usually no smoke without fire . 

  " Yeah . " 

  Silence . 

  " Yessirree . " 

  A sigh . 

  " And after the fire , the fire still burns ... 

  But there's freedom of speech . 

  What if you walked into a crowded theatre and yelled " Fire ! " 

  Is that freedom of speech ? " 

  I should hope so . 

  Sometimes there's an excess of freedom . 

  " Yeah , there is , is not there ? 

  People lose perspective on things . 

  Which is really easy to do in artificial environments . 

  You just accept it . 

  Today I am here in Madrid and that's just what's goin' on . 

  There's a light at the end of the tunnel . 

  This is my reality , it's what I have to do . " 

  BY THE time I get to see Kurt , it's over an hour after the show's finished . 

  I am watching Chris and Dave fool around at a disc presentation ceremony , a routine they're well versed in by now , and talking kilt tartans to Matt Cameron from Soundgarden , who were due to play here with Guns N' Roses the following night but the gig's been cancelled . 

  Anton tells me I can have 20 minutes and then he's sending the other two on to finish things off . 

  He does not make it clear whether these are the only terms to which Kurt would agree to do an interview . 

  It's pretty obvious that Kurt Cobain has been running on reserve tanks for most of this Euro-jaunt . 

  Never have I seen him so static onstage , so apparently unmoved by the whole experience of playing rock'n' roll . 

  The contrast is made all the more poignant by the " Lithium " promo vid and its scenes of psyched-up mayhem from last year's Reading . 

  " Yeah , last year's shows were way better , " he nods . 

  " I do not think we've had a along enough break . 

  I am still not enjoying it as much as I should . 

  According to our manager and most of the people we work with , the break that we had was too long . 

  Everyone wants us to work and work all the time and not stop . 

  It was only four months of relaxation and I really needed that . 

  I've come to a lot of conclusions about myself within the last four months . 

  I've learned to accept the fact of being a rock star and how big the band's become . 

  I can at least deal with it , I am not as pissed off as I was . 

  It's still ... 

  I du n no . 

  I am such a picky person that everything has to be perfect . " 

  Does it feel like you created something that's got to be broken down now ? 

  " Well , it's a bit embarrassing to play in front of kids who wear Skid Row T-shirts , y'know ? " he chuckles . 

  " It's really hard to overcome that , to just shake it off and say , " Oh well , they're just dumb kids , maybe they will throw away their Skid Row records and listen to Mudhoney because of us ... " but that story's old . 

  I am tired of talking about " the underground " ! 

  " I've never claimed to be a punk rocker , I've just claimed to have liked punk rock music . 

  I'd like to be a rhythm guitar player in a band ! 

  No-one realises how f--in' hard it is to scream at the top of your lungs and concentrate on playing guitar solos . 

  We're actually thinking of getting Buzz from The Melvins in to play guitar with us live . 

  It's still not gon na relive me of my vocal duties , though . " 

  Oh , yes Kurt , but the band would not be the same if you did not sing . 

  " No , I know that . " 

  He laughs . 

  " Well maybe I could start another band . 

  I am thinking of doing that , actually , with Mark Arm and Eric from Hole . 

  But then , I am so lazy with this band I could not imagine being in two bands at once . 

  Jesus ! " 

  It sounds like you'd like to escape from the limelight . 

  Does it get you down to read every week that you're a heroin addict ? 

  " Yeah , it does get to me , it pisses me off . 

  I had no idea that being in a commercial rock band would be like this , because I've never paid attention to other commercial rock bands . 

  I've never read a U2 interview so I do not know if there are rumours about them doing insane things . 

  I am not really aware of any other rock band that have had so many rumours written about them . 

  Guns N " Roses went into it admitting stuff , trying to create something , same with Jane's Addiction . 

  who totally flaunted it , totally glamorised heroin use . 

  I think that's ridiculous . " 

  There then follows the weirdest episode of a pretty weird two days . 

  I've just asked Kurt whether the heroin rumours are true -- to which he's laughed , said " No ! " and made me feel his arms for any tell-tale scars or holes , though obviously shooting up is not the only way to take smack and to be honest I am not sure I knew what I was meant to be looking for , but still , it's an impressive gesture at the very least -- when Anton walks in with a woman I recognise as Susan Silver , manager of Soundgarden . 

  She waves at Kurt , says , " I just wan na say goodnight , " then sits down next to him . 

  Anton tells me to turn the tape machine off . 

  Why ? 

  " Just turn it off ! " 

  As well as being a sweet guy , Anton's a useful Thai boxer and he's got these dogs , see ... 

  So off it goes . 

  Susan talks intently to Kurt , looking directly into his eyes , the gist of it being just call me if there's anything you want , then she and Anton leave . 

  Erm , Kurt , about what you were saying ... 

  " See ! 

  She thinks I am on heroin ! " he whispers excitedly . 

  " She does ! 

  Did not you see it in her eyes ? 

  And I've heard it from a whole bunch of people , she says stuff , she actually tells people I am on heroin all the time . 

  That's Soundgarden's manager , it goes from the f--in' highest level of people in the music industry down to the street punk kids . " 

  MAKE OF all this what you will . 

  Perhaps I was naive enough to suppose that , when you've sold as many records as Nirvana have , it would convey power , a means by which the band could control their own destiny . 

  And maybe it has but it also seems to have raised the stakes unhelpfully , even dangerously high . 

  Maybe I am reading too much into little things , maybe it's all as petty as Dave says and maybe I am just fearing the worst . 

  Frankly , having spent two days looking at how different it is for Nirvana right now -- or rather , how it was six weeks ago -- I found it difficult not to . 

  No , look , Reading'll be great , just the boost they need . 

  They can still do it , you know . 

  Put Kurt Cobain , Dave Grohl and Chris Novoselic on a stage or in a rehearsal space or in a studio and they can still wreak magic , the three losers who took on the world and won . 

  And once the baby's born everyone's bound to calm down and take stock of things , realise what's important in life . 

  Because that's all it is , after all , it's only life . 

  Dave : " Did you know if you take the " N " and the " D " and the first " E " out of " Nevermind " it spells " vermin " ? 

  Chris : " Mmm . " 

  Kurt . 

  " Wow . " 

  It seems like one million years BC ( Before Courtney ) 

  No future ? 

  Nirvana away from the petty tour drama ( and drama queens ) : Chris Novoselic , Kurt " Mr Disguise " Cobain and Dave Grohl 

  DIE FLAYED ALIVE ! 

  Many reckon the swinging'60s ended the night followers of deranged hippy guru CHARLES MANSON broke into the house of Roman Polanski and brutally murdered its occupants -- including Polanski's pregnant young wife Sharon Tate . 

  Since then a huge influence on sicko rockers everywhere , the whole gory story has been re-cast as a full-blown opera -- The Manson Family . 

  EDWIN POUNCEY , naturally , had to investigate ... 

  Now is the time ... for " Helter Skelter " , hippy cult leader Charles Manson ordered four of his Family on the fateful and fear-filled night of August 8 , 1969 . 

  It was a command that would result in the slaying of actress of Sharon Tate ( who was pregnant with film director Roman Polanski's child at the time of her fatal stabbing ) , coffee heiress Abigail Folger and her lover Wojiciech Frykowski , delivery boy Steven Earl Parent and Hollywood hair stylist to the stars , Jay Sebring . 

  Manson's hand-picked " death squad " for this murderous mission was made up of Susan Atkins , Patricia Krenwinkiel , Linda Kasabian ( who would later turn witness for the prosecution at the controversial trial that followed ) and Tex Watson who , when asked by a terrified Frykowski who he was , calmly replied , " I am the devil , and I am here on the devil's business . " 

  When all five victims were stabbed or shot to death , Susan Atkins dipped a towel in Sharon Tate's blood and daubed the single word " Pig " on the living-room door . 

  Manson was so pleased with the ensuing panic that rippled through Hollywood after the murders were discovered that he organised another raid , this time with himself as the leader . 

  As well as the four responsible for the Tate slayings , Manson also invited Family members Clem Gorgan and Leslie Van Houten to join in the fun . 

  Sky high on hallucinogenics , they descended upon the home of 47-year-old supermarket boss Leno LaBianca , who was at home with his wife Rosemary . 

  Both received multiple fatal stab wounds and , as in the Tate case , the walls of the LaBianca apartment were daubed , this time with the words " Death To Pigs " , " Rise " and " Healter Skelter " ( sic ) in the victims' blood . 

  THE TATE/ LaBIANCA killings shocked America and the world . 

  It was felt that Manson and his Family had not only been responsible for the death of seven people , but also for the death of innocence , and suddenly hippies were not cute or funny any more . 

  As the media went rabid with outrage , a for and against Manson/ Family industry began to boom . 

  Suddenly , sleazy accounts of the murders appeared in book form , Manson's image was plastered on the covers of such respected magazines as Life and Rolling Stone , Manson T-shirts , bumper stickers and recordings of his songs were available everywhere , and it seemed that the bizarre element of the Family's life and crimes had captured the imagination of both freaks and straight society . 

  Manson was , and remains to this day , America's number one bogeyman and is regularly pilloried and looked on in fascination by a world that still cannot believe such things happened . 

  Before the Tate/ LaBianca murders happened , however , Charles Manson was attempting to make it as a rock star . 

  He had already convinced Beach Boy Dennis Wilson of his musical powers and had plans to make an LP , which he hoped to release on a major record label . 

  Then there was Manson's fascination with the music of The Beatles which , he was convinced , somewhat derangedly , was peppered with secret personal messages for his ears only . 

  It is this element of Charlie that has perhaps made him popular with other ( albeit less twisted ) musicians . 

  Amongst the many who have paid tribute to Charlie are Sonic Youth , Anthrax , Neil Young , Throbbing Gristle and a host of guitarcore grungemeisters who have incorporated the Manson look into their image or current product . 

  The latest musical Manson statement , however , is not a three-minute thrash song or a badly recorded " smuggled " prison tape from the man himself , currently locked up in San Quentin , but a full-blown opera entitled The Manson Family by New York composer John Moran . 

  Moran's opera concentrates on the Family's life together at the remote Spahn Ranch , the Tate murders and Manson's subsequent trial , all of which is delivered in an impressionistic style with no real narrative structure to hold the separate elements of the tale together . 

  The result is a wild , and sometimes very scary , portrait of Manson , his teachings and his bad craziness ; a look from behind those piercing cold eyes as the listener to Moran's opera is suddenly given an expressway journey to the back of Charlie's skull . 

  INTRIGUED BY John Moran's project , we discussed it in more depth . 

  I was half expecting some serious , mumbling classical music type , but instead I found an intelligent and lively personality whose last opera was a portrait of American comedian Jack Benny . 

  Is there a connection between Jack Benny and Charles Manson , by any chance ? 

  Is The Manson Family a sequel perhaps ? 

  " Well , they did not live far apart , " laughs John . 

  " Actually , that was the first thing that made somebody show me something about Manson , when I was wondering who Jack Benny's neighbours might have been . 

  Somebody said , well a few years later it was Charles Manson and I said , who ? 

  When I was a kid ( Moran was born in 1965 ) I knew the name , I knew it was someone scary , but I did not really know anything about the story or how exactly wild things really were . " 

  Did you have to do a lot of research ? 

  " I did a lot of research into what the characters were like , I was not so much interested in the facts of the case of the dates and specifics , but , I actually got to know Susan Atkins pretty well , one of the Family members who is now in prison . 

  She's actually a really nice woman and she took a lot of time to really explain to me what was going on with her at that time . 

  I was really surprised at how down to earth she was , I did not really know what to expect , but she granted me interviews and I do not think she has ever granted an interview from prison before . " 

  How about Charlie , does he know about The Manson Family ? 

  " I am sure he does , yeah . 

  The Wall Street Journal gave the opera a bad review when it was performed at Lincoln Centre . 

  I did not see that review but evidently they called Charlie a creep . 

  Manson saw that somehow and decided to write them a letter because he did not like being called a creep . 

  That became a famous story , where they almost cancelled the record because they thought the Manson Family were after them or something ! 

  It did not make a lot of sense . " 

  SUCH CREEPY-crawly paranoia , however , is at the heart of Moran's vision of the Family at work and slay . 

  In his youth , I discover , he too was sucked into a hippy cult that was dominated by a leader with suggestive powers . 

  " It was a really strange group who were devoted to ( famous psychologist ) Carl Jung . 

  It was very different from the Manson Family in that no drugs were allowed , and no orgies or anything were going on . 

  It was called the Psychological Club , but basically it was all centred around this one very strange guy who had interpreted Jung's teachings in a very strange way . 

  It was about how the unconscious was taking over and the Revelations were coming down ... 

  It's probably kind of true ! " 

  Were you controlled in any way ? 

  " Oh completely , absolutely . 

  Me and all my friends ended up in this cult and the first thing this guy said we had to do was turn all of our friendships against each other so that we could not trust anybody . 

  Isolation is basic cult tactics , especially isolation from any of your old friends . 

  We all worked and lived at the same place and it seemed pretty cool to me at the time , but it started to become more and more negative until it got to the point where I wanted to leave ... and I realised that they would not let me ! 

  I was 19 , that's about the same age as most of the Manson group were . " 

  For the recording of his The Manson Family , Moran decided to take on the role of Charlie himself , his unsettling experience with the Psychological Club being , perhaps , influential to his chilling performance . 

  " I do not really look like Manson at all , " he admits , " but I just felt that I could do it best ! 

  I wanted to have that control in the studio , being able to step in at any moment . " 

  Did you have to psych yourself up for the part ? 

  " I did , but at the same time I felt like I understood Manson because , maybe in a superficial way , I felt like I naturally spoke like him . 

  I am from Nebraska and he's from Kentucky and the accent is fairly similar , we both have very nasal accents and I just pushed this as a musical thing . " 

  The other main performance to listen out for on The Manson Family is Iggy Pop's characterisation of prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi who , for artistic reasons , Moran has chosen to re-christen Jack Lord , the name of the actor who played suave and sophisticated TV detective Steve McGarrett on Hawaii Five-O . 

  What gives , John ? 

  " Hawaii Five-O was a hit show while the Manson Family was on trial , and before that it was a really drab , boring FBI kind of show . 

  Then suddenly , when Manson was in the headlines , as popular shows do , they said , we've got ta keep up with the times and Hawaii Five-O went super psychedelic . 

  They started chasing after all these hippy cult groups and all the criminals were on drugs . 

  I thought it was a good analogy to how Manson had affected the country , how he had really wedged himself into the American family to the extent that he's now on the country's most popular TV show . 

  I also thought that there was a certain similarity in the way Steve McGarrett and Vincent Bugliosi tried to present themselves . " 

  And how did you get on working with Iggy Pop ? 

  " He's a very , very nice guy , " enthuses John . 

  " We actually wrote some pop songs together at that time , it was fun . " 

  THE OTHER reason for tuning into Moran's Manson opera is to hear how he has deformed the music of The Beatles to fit inside the mad brain of Charlie . 

  " I thought that one of the most interesting things about the Manson case was how they thought that The Beatles were talking to them , and that they thought The Beatles were the four horsemen of the apocalypse mentioned in the Bible . 

  I really thought that was funny because , once you start listening to their music with that in mind , suddenly almost everything they say starts to become very cryptic . 

  And of course , being a composer , I think it would be very hard not to have been influenced by The Beatles . " 

  What about the music of Charles Manson himself , did that have any influence on your opera ? 

  " I would not say that Charlie's music was a huge influence , he plays guitar in one scene of the opera but never really gets past tuning it . 

  I did not figure his playing was very good , it kinda reminded me of Tom Jones ( at one point the Family actually targeted Jones -- Apocryphal Ed ) a little bit . 

  Which is funny , because all the Manson girls that I've seen on film and stuff , when they talk about Charlie's music they always say , he was great , he was as good as Tom Jones ! 

  Is not that weird ? " 

  Weird for sure but , erm ... not unusual . 

  Manson Family composer John Moran : " I understood Manson ... 

  I felt like I spoke like him . " 

  MANSON ON RECORD 

  CHARLES MANSON AND THE FAMILY : Lie 

  MANSON'S SOLO LP , featuring songs that he originally presented to Byrds producer Terry Melcher in the hope of landing a major record deal . 

  Melcher refused and was subsequently put on the Family's death list . 

  " Lie " was finally released by Awareness , a subsidiary of Bernard Stollman's eccentric ESP-Disk . 

  The sleeve artwork was directly ripped from the infamous Manson/ Life magazine front cover , altered slightly to tell the Family's side of the story . 

  " Lie " has since been bootlegged and reissued on various labels and is still available . 

  The latest reissue bears a sticker that claims all sales will go to the victims' families . 

  THE MANSON FAMILY : Sings The Songs Of Charles Manson 

  PREVIOUSLY UNISSUED creepy-crawly recordings of Charlie's angels crooning the master's songbook . 

  THE BEACH BOYS : Never Learn Not To Love aka Cease To Exist 

  WHILE HANGING ten with the Beach Boys' Dennis Wilson ( who described Charlie as " the magician " ) , Manson managed to charm him into accepting one of his songs for the band's'20/ 20 " LP . 

  Originally titled " Cease To Exist " , it appeared on the record ( and the B-side of the follow-up 45 ) as " Never Learn Not To Love " . 

  Manson was , however , not credited on either release . 

  THE BEATLES : Helter Skelter 

  THE WEIRD and wild ride off The Beatles' " White Album " was adopted by Manson and the Family as the main battle cry for his crazed cause . 

  Other artists who have covered the song include Siouxsie And The Banshees and U2 ... 

  " Charles Manson stole this song from The Beatles , " announces Bono portentously on " Rattle &amp;amp; Hum " . 

  " We're stealing it back again ! " 

  THE BEATLES : Piggies 

  AGAIN FROM the Fab Four's " White Album " , " Piggies " is a George Harrison song about how useless the human race is . 

  Manson was suitably impressed and strongly identified with Hari-George's sentiments of disgust . 

  NEIL YOUNG : Mansion On The Hill 

  OR " MANSON On The Hill " , as some Young aficionados would prefer to interpret it . 

  This well strange song from Young's great " Ragged Glory " LP is reckoned by many to be an oblique nod in the direction of Charlie . 

  SONIC YOUTH &amp;amp; LYDIA LUNCH : Death Valley'69 

  NEW YORK artpunk sonically salutes Charlie with this trippy tribute to the Family's slaughter of the hippy'60s . 

  RIP ! 

  SUED'S CORNER 

  They used to be Captain America , until Mr Marvel got the hump and Mr C&amp;amp;A took exception to their logo , now they're called EUGENIUS , Kurt Cobain still likes them a lot and they may well be the new Nirvana of Vaselined Fannies . 

  IAN McCANN heralds the arrival of the next pop star called Gordon 

  Lunchtime , Glasgow . 

  In a city-centre bar , the four members of Eugenius are convening for what they might call work . 

  Others might call it drinking , smoking , eating , and taking the piss out of each other , but to these lads , these activities are a vital part of the job . 

  The first to arrive is Gordon Keen . 

  Gordon is , potentially , the first pop star called Gordon since Sting , and you may have noticed that even Sting does not call himself Gordon . 

  From Gordon's insistence on calling himself Gordon , you can take the inference that he's an easy-going , natural kind of guy , garrulous and unafraid to tell stories that the rest of the band openly mock . 

  Gordon and I sit at a table as the old snowys sup their milk stouts and get ready to cross the road to the theatre , where several stars of television are about to perform the fabulous musical My Fair Lady . 

  We look at the pub clock and wonder where the rest of the band are . 

  The Gordon looks at the door , and they're outside , stuffing pies and sandwiches down their faces . 

  It's cheaper than eating here , and when you're the next Nirvana , rather than the current one , every penny counts . 

  Several mouthfuls later we're all at the same table . 

  Raymond Boyle , Eugenius " bassplayer looks like a harder version of Martin Gilks from The Wonder Stuff . 

  The lanky Ray frittered away last night in a video-game marathon with Roy Lawrence . 

  Roy is the epitome of the young indie drummer : a mop of faintly dirty-looking hair topping a pale , almost juvenile face . 

  His Edinburgh roots are freely attacked by the other members , who call the city's fabulous medieval showpiece Spam Castle , claiming that the building cost Edinburgh so much that it could not afford anything worth having . 

  Eugene Kelly , their leader , singer and guitarist , was apparently named after the band . 

  It's lucky they did not choose to call themselves Captain America or something silly like that , because it might have proved embarrassing . 

  The straight-haired , elegant Eugene appears to be the most cerebral member , which is odd since his previous incarnation was as leader of the decidedly bodily Vaselines , a group for whom the term " Kings Of Perv-Rock " might have been invented . 

  Fortunately , it was not . 

  Eugene is not drinking today and appears a shade queasy . 

  Whether you're a fan or not -- and God knows other bands have tried to make damn sure you are -- you shall know them soon enough . 

  They've been hyped by Kurt Cobain , who seems to be wearing their logo in almost every picture . 

  " We gave Nirvana three dress shirts , " says Gordon , quizzically . 

  " I've never seen the other two wearing them , but Kurt always has one on ... wonder if he ever changes it ? " 

  Unfortunately , those shirts are no longer relevant , but more about that later . 

  Suffice to say that with the patronage of the Teen Spiriters and help from local heroes Teenage Fanclub in the shape of Brendan O'Hare's drumming in the pre-Roy era , Eugenius are not short of influential friends . 

  The Nirvana connection was cemented by covers of two Vaselines songs , " Molly's Lips " and " Son Of A Gun " , on a Peel session , and Eugene was called onstage by Kurt at Reading last year to sing " Molly's Lips " . 

  Says Eugene modestly , " Kurt asked me did I want to go on , and I said " Great " , but I shat myself . 

  Then I got on and saw all those people and thought " Hold on , they're just folk " , and I had a really good sing-song . " 

  " And a pose , " says Gordon . 

  " And a pose , and an Elvis impression , " confirms Eugene . 

  " When I came off , I said " I ran onstage and there was this resounding sound of 30,000 people going " Who the f--'s that ? " to each other ! " 

  THEIR DEBUT album , " Oomalamaa " , is a bit of an oddity . 

  According to Eugene , the band signed to Paperhouse ( also the Fannies' first home , surely no coincidence ) to make one single , which expanded to a mini-album and wound up being " Oomalama " . 

  It was cut on the run with a small budget and only half the band : Ray arrived about halfway through and Roy joined later . 

  Hence the fiery , fluid guitars churning sound and sometimes decidedly personal moments ( the painful " Hot Dog " is an example ) are probably only part of the story . 

  If this lot really are the new Nirvana , as some would have it , then " Oomalama " is not even their " Bleach " . 

  That's not to say that it's not worth listening to : it clearly is , and it grows larger the more you hear it . 

  But it is probably not an exact representation of what today's Eugenius are about . 

  Think of it as an introduction ; a statement of intent . 

  " We were writing songs under pressure , " explains Eugene . 

  " We had time booked , songs were arranged in the studio and I was writing lyrics on the day they sang them . 

  When you look back you can see what's wrong with it . 

  But there's no way you can get round it with the way it was recorded . " 

  Gordon eats a pub lunch , meticulously coating everything in brown sauce , salt , pepper , vinegar and lemon juice to the amusement of all . 

  When he's eaten , we amble out into a grey Glasgow afternoon and head for the Kelvingrove gallery and museum , a 2 taxi ride . 

  Eventually we drift out into the leafy park behind the museum . 

  Eugene remembers playing football here with various Pastels ( Eugene's first " name " band ) , Norman from the Fannies , and Bobby Gillespie , who he recalls as a good , surprisingly hard player . 

  We sit on a bench beneath a tree as the sky begins to spit cool rain . 

  People wander by with dogs of both varieties : devil and angelic . 

  Pigeons pester for food , and a squirrel comes up , drawn by the rustle of Rizlas . 

  We talk about how the band seemed to arrive from nowhere , and Eugene says : " I think we got too much attention too early on . 

  I wish we'd had time to work on things . 

  We seemed to get press really easily ... " 

  Do not go blaming us . 

  " You buggers done it ! 

  No , it started at our first show in Glasgow , and then we got support slots with Mudhoney before we were a developed band . 

  We were just guys going at it , playing some of my songs . " 

  " We got offered a lot of European dates after Reading , " says Gordon , " but we backed off to rehearse and then went to America . 

  Now the rhythm section's so strong and permanent , we can almost deconstruct the songs and create more space in what we're doing . " 

  That trip to America was a minor fiasco . 

  The two headlining dates sold out on the strength of Kurt Cobain's influential praise , and the " Flame On " single sold heavily on the college campuses . 

  Unfortunately , it all happened so fast that they cancelled the sold-out dates because they simply could not get their work permits in time . 

  The tour was a shock to the system , particularly Gordon's : back home afterwards , his doctor told him he had a damaged liver . 

  Gordon would have failed the audition that Roy passed ; introduced to Eugenius by the " Oomalama " engineer , the drummer proved his mettle not by thumping tubs but sinking pints . 

  " He did not know , " smirks Gordon , " but we knew he'd got the job when he did not throw up . " 

  And I got a round in , " protests the multi-talented Roy . 

  EUGENIUS WERE then called Captain America , which is why Kurt's shirts are an anachronism . 

  Named after a famous comic superhero , the band were threatened with legal action by Marvel Comics , who owned the copyright . 

  " We chose the worst f--in' year to do that , " laments Gordon . 

  " It's Captain America's big birthday in 1992 , 50 years or something , so we were the last thing Marvel wanted around . 

  The thing came right from the top of the company . 

  when we played CBGB's this guy who's some sort of junior manager for Marvel came up afterwards and said he really liked the band and that it was a shit thing they sued us . " 

  " For half an hour it was scary and now it seems funny , " says Gordon . 

  Likewise , Captain America were also threatened by C&amp;amp;A , of all people , who felt that the band's logo was an infringement of copyright . 

  Hence " Flame On " came as both a picture and plain-sleeved single . 

  " We've got ta be the only band in history to be sued by a comics company and a clothing company , " says Eugene , wryly . 

  They're now determined never to buy their clothes at C&amp;amp;A . 

  I suggest that Converse might be interested in their star logo , a kind of Captain America hangover , but it might be worse ... they do know that there was a'50s band called Eugenius , who cut two LPs for RCA ? 

  " You're jokin' ! " splutters Gordon , and they crack up . 

  Well , there was Euphoria , who made an album before one of them had a sex-change . 

  Ask them what they think about being called the new Nirvana of Vaselined Fannies and they shrug , offering the usual lines about comparisons being inevitable . 

  " I think we're moving more left-field while the Fanclub are going more right-field , more melodic and Countryish , " says Gordon . 

  " They're like The Eagles while we're like Eddie &amp;amp; The Hot Rods ... " 

  Oomalama ! 

  And , with one B flat chord , Eugenius save rock'n'roll ! 

  I can see the NME cover now . 

  Or maybe not . 

  They're just too sincere and clever to be ruined like the " Rods . 

  Besides which , they do not sound anything like them . 

  The Nirvana comparisons are equally askew , and they're not as retro as the Fannies . 

  Already they've got people willing to fly from LA to New York to see them , and people going to every date of their domestic tours . 

  I suppose there's always nutters about , but there is something special about the band , and I do not just mean their liability to lawsuits . 

  We walk back through the park and disperse : tonight they're going to a party , it's Paul from The Soup Dragons " birthday . 

  Doubtless several Fannies will be there , mebbe a Primal , a Mary Chain . 

  Mebbe one day Eugenius will be the biggest of the lot . 

  It's about time we had a pop star called Gordon again . 

  One litigation under a groove : Eugenius ( clockwise from top ) 

  SINGLES 

  REVIEWED BY STEVEN WELLS 

  PURE : Greedy -- The Morphine Mix 

  I thought I'd hate this . 

  PURE : one word , four letters -- almost a guarantee a band are going to be SHIT . 

  WRONG . 

  This has a shuffling joss-sticky booga-booga spook beat and a strange haircut ; this is the record that Pop Will Eat Itself have been trying to make for the past 24 months , the grinning idiot love-child of Mr Desmond Drugmusic and Mrs Winnie Indiewhine brought up in a radical lesbian commune in Vancouver , Canada and fed on a diet of black pudding and Ecstasy . 

  If I were to tell you that this record puts a dayglo platform DM so far up the mule's rectum that its entrails squish through its clenched teeth , I do not think that I could be justly accused of exaggeration . 

  SINEAD O'CONNOR : Success Has Made A Failure Of Our Home 

  Every year an Irish festival is held in the park opposite our house . 

  In front of the stage , featuring dead serious folkie types in Arran sweaters and barnacle-encrusted fisherman's boots , mingles a paltry handful of die-hards . 

  Meanwhile , on the other side of the park , a huge crowd of all ages has a right old laugh in front of the stage on which stomp a Teddy Boy-outfitted showband blasting out Showaddywaddy's greatest hits liberally mixed with C&amp;amp;W classics . 

  Does this tell us something about Irish pop stars ? 

  Probably not , but one cannot help but speculate that the popularity of the showband in the Republic might go some way to explain the somewhat over-earnest search for " authenticity " exhibited by U2 . 

  Does Bono dream of electric sheep ? 

  So Sinead O'Connor -- probably our last remaining real rock star , a maverick , a 1000 per cent attack merchant constantly taking convention by the neck and shaking it the way a terrier shakes a rat , the woman who stormed into the Irish PM's office over the abortion issue , who refused to sing the US national anthem , who correctly pointed out that George Bush leaves Saddam Hussein standing in the mass-murder stakes , who has exposed her own sad past in vivid , gory detail , whose every record has fully stretched and excited the expectations of her audience -- has released a version of Loretta Lynn's maudlin Country classic . 

  The strings and horns are both lush and delicate , gone completely are the swooping whoops and hollers -- Sinead sings , gently , sweetly , taking the material totally on its own terms . 

  She follows this with a beautifully breathy version of Cole Porter's " You Do Something To Me " ( from " Red , Hot &amp;amp; Blue " ) and the Marilyn Monroe classic " I Want To Be Loved By You " ( boo boo be doo ! ) and ( next week , fan mugs ! ) you get the chance to buy the second half of this two CD set including the title track ( again ) plus " Someone To Watch Over Me " and -- wait for it -- " My Heart Belongs To Daddy " . 

  Alright , so the Monroe song is perhaps subverted by Sinead's sharp , orgasmic " Ow Ow " at the end , but otherwise what we have here is straight-down-the-line , brilliantly performed grandparent-friendly pre-rock'n' roll pop . 

  Why ? 

  You dare to ask why ? 

  You do not question the motives of a pop genius , little fanboy . 

  MINDLESS DISCO MUSIC FOR SCOUSER DRUG ADDICTS AND STINKING HIPPIES SINGLE OF THE WEEK 

  WHERE'S THE BEACH : Sex Slave Zombie 

  In the last episode of Star Trek -- The Next Generation shown in this country , Captain Jean Luc Picard is kidnapped by the beastly automaton alien hive-race -- the Borg . 

  Like the rest of the Borg , Jean Luc is stripped of all individual personality and forced to walk around with wires poking out from all his most intimate parts . 

  " Aha ! " quipped my musician flatmate , " What an apt metaphor for techno ! " 

  The sad fool . 

  " Sex Stare Zombie " is , quite simply , the best pop record of the week . 

  The fact that it is made by men with no faces and only two fingers each merely makes it all the more remarkable . 

  Doubtless the NME discopolice will now sneer and tell me this is a rubbish record and the version put out by Monty Palago &amp;amp; Wonka Vibe Jambo and remixed by AKU Faction Z in 1969 was much better -- they always do . 

  But to hell with them , this is monstrous and beautiful . 

  If I was of a mind to stop washing and shaving and go live in a bus and drive around the country shitting in farmers' fields and killing their sheep and being hassled by the pigs and pilloried by the Daily Star and generally being " free " , this is the record I would choose to do it to . 

  The Beach-heads hear they've been cursed by a Swells SOTW 

  ABBA : Dancing Queen 

  BLUEBOY : Popkiss 

  BANANARAMA : Movin' On 

  THEE HEADCOATEES : My Boyfriend's Learning Karate 

  THE DARLING BUDS : Sure Thing 

  DIESEL PARK WEST : God Only Knows 

  SNUFF : Cubical 

  Let us take the Abs' third finest three minutes as our standard measure of a lovely pop record , a gloriously lush piece of silly bollocks to which all else must be compared . 

  Here are Blueboy ( dreadful name , sniff suspiciously ) . 

  It says " Sarah 65 " on the sleeve , a sleeve which depicts two out of focus young men in nice jumpers and carefully ironed Levi 501's throwing stones on some pebbly south coast beach ( lip curls ) . 

  Are they trying to brain a charging riot policeman or a pack of snarling , Union Jack-waving skinhead Morrissey fans ? 

  It is doubtful . 

  Here it comes ( tense up , growl ) . 

  Acoustic strumming , feeble , breathless posho whining about being sad ( ATTACK ! 

  ATTACK ! 

  RENDER LIMB FROM LIMB ! ) . 

  If you were in a wine bar with ferns , mellowed out on red wine and having a really sloppy kissy kissy lovey dovey ooghy woogy dinner with your lover and Blueboy came on as the cabaret , you would go berserk and slash open their gizzards with the cake fork . 

  The world's Number One Abba fan , Henry Rollins , has been informed of their home address . 

  NEXT ! 

  Thee Headcoatees wear deer stalkers and plastic macs and play semi-acoustics on a distinctly hammy , Mersey-beaty cod-Japanese novelty record . 

  Just stupid and irritating enough to be a minor hit -- but I doubt it . 

  Shuvorn has gorn off picking daisies in Katie Jane Garside doolally-land and the new one who used to pose in leather mags is no longer , but the two " Nanas that remain are fitter and leaner than ever . 

  This is not prime SAW , but at least it's good pop music . 

  Mad little Andrea of The Darling Buds is pictured on the sleeve of " Sure Thing " with various things dangling from her prehensile lips . 

  This will not , however , suffice to disguise the fact that this format -- bok-bok drums , half-hearted grungy guitars , submerged breathy vocals and a lilting semi-melody -- is so lame and tired it should be taken down the vets for a lethal injection . 

  And there is an A&amp;amp;R man at EMI who is still utterly stunned that Diesel Park West are not huger than The Rolling Stones . 

  This is the carbohydrate stodge we were warned about in the Kylie article . 

  Snuff are what the Manics sneeringly refer to as " a T-shirt band " -- meaning a group of young southern Englishmen forever willing to amble about in Transit van land and getting the occasional play on rubbish indie radio shows that nobody with any taste listens to . 

  On the strength of this piss-poor piddle of cockernee shouty dribble , they're absolutely right . 

  PSYCHO SEXUAL SEX TERRESTRIALS : Personal War 

  Great name . 

  Welsh . 

  Have written endless letters to Angst challenging the Manic Street Preachers to physical combat . 

  How could they be anything other than wonderful ? 

  Sadly , they manage to combine all the worst qualities of the bedroom-band with none of the saving graces . 

  A total lack of musical skill combined with a total lack of imagination is a terrible thing to have to sit and listen to . 

  Pack it in , you lot should be music journalists . 

  NICK CAVE AND THE BAD SEEDS : I Had A Dream , Joe 

  What exactly is the appeal of this Cave cow ? 

  His lyrics are abysmal tosh , his singing voice so stunted , adenoidal and gumby that it takes a real effort of will to remember that this is not a joke , that this man is actually worshipped as a rock god by literally millions of depressed , terminally adolescent would-be heroin addicts worldwide . 

  He has got great bone structure and a really cool Addams Family wardrobe and he has written a novel , let us be fair . 

  But his music , come on , Emperor's New Clothes time or what ? 

  The bloke's records are all rubbish and it's high time you all admitted it . 

  Or am I missing something ? 

  Is he , perhaps , a greater poet and a great operatic tenor who merely sings pretentious bollocks in a voice that sounds as if he's drowning in his own snot as a sort of joke ? 

  Hmmmm ... 

  SEAWEED : Bill 

  AFGHAN WINGS : My World Is Empty Without You 

  TOM WAITS : Goin' Out West 

  " Little brown sausages living in the sand ! " 

  Grrrr ! 

  In my dreams , Tom Waits , sick of life in the CD racks of the brain-dead baby boomer scum , moves to Seattle and picks up three thrash-lobotomised longhairies with whom to party . 

  The title track is so gruffly aggressive , tub-thumping mock-macho Jack-swigging radio-unfriendly urghygurghy rockadilly mad that it could be Tad in a good mood , dude . 

  At the end of the track the drummer throws down his sticks in disgust and stomps off -- pretty punk rock or what ? 

  After that , Waits retreats into his usual ho humdrum bummed-out bluesywoozy alkie drone mode mood muzak , the sort of mozzery gushy mush your dog would make if it had vocal chords and could handle its drink . 

  After predictably brash , bright and breezy powerpop run-throughs of " Bill " and " Pumpkin " , Seaweed deliver a stupid , sexy and slyly squiggly head-screwing dubversh of " Squint " , which goes on far , far too long unless one is savagely drugged . 

  The Whigs mangle the " Paint It Black " riff and insert it vigorously and repeatedly into the dry , dusty shell of a sad song about masturbation as a lifestyle priority rather than an optional extra . 

  Breaking down the walls of knobache is , of course , the most clichd subject possible for a pop song but this is both swirly and burly and rarfer tasty . 

  SKID ROW : Youth Gone Wild 

  Blond pop sextoy Sebastian Bach once bowled me over with his combination of genital-stirring good looks and demented spiel . 

  Thus was I blinded to the fact that he is , in fact , the quintessential heavy metal arsehole . 

  Skid Row are ninth row division Guns N'Roses wannabes , and this turgid slab of rotting , flyblown rock ratmeat is about as sexy , young and wild as the corpse of David Mellor in a bulging G-string . 

  It is a tragedy of enormous proportions that their remains a vast audience for this achingly fake corporate " rebellion " . 

  POP WILL EAT ITSELF : Bullet Proof 

  The Poppies have , on occasion , made pop music so wonderful that the gods themselves have wept with delight . 

  They have also , it must be admitted , sometimes floundered and fumbled like ten-thumbed , hammer-footed , constipated , sexless oafs . 

  This is dumb stodge , an unsightly glob of yellowing lard studded with fag ends and bluebottle eggs , festering in the corner of some little frequented Midlands transport caf . 

  SMASHING PUMPKINS : I Am One 

  An Angster recently asked why the music press devotes so much attention to US bands . 

  Because , sucker , taken en masse , they piss on their British peers . 

  This " Gish " out-take is no earth-shattering pop classic , just a steely example of sweaty-fingered , control-freak intelligent-metal , and it still sounds eight to ten times superior to the Brit stuff that surrounds it in this week's pile of singles . 

  RANCID HELL SPAWN : Gastro Boy 

  ANTIHEROS : Election Day 

  SUPERCONDUCTOR : Heave With Puppy 

  EMPIRE FALLS : No Minute Warning 

  Every single time I do this job I find a new record by Rancid Hell Spawn on top of the pile . 

  Every time I rave about how sexy Rancid Hell Spawn's distorted , chaotic pop-stupidity is and every time you take not a blind bit of notice . 

  It is your loss . 

  Rancid Hell Spawn , you are the real Kings Of Rock and I salute you . 

  American slapheads Antiheros produce some fine leftish skinheady shouty music backed by a track entitled " Oi ! " in which we learn that Oi ! is " the sound of the street for rebels " . 

  Actually Oi ! was a mock-working class derivation of punk rock invented by a pig-faced scab which , thanks to the cowardice and stupidity of its main advocates , had rather a lot of Nazi scum amongst its rather dim cockernee fan base . 

  Morrissey , it should be pointed out , had absolutely nothing to do with it at the time . 

  Superconductor are wonderfully stupid and noisy , everybody playing a different tune and having a whale of a time whilst the singer gargles disinfectant . 

  Empire Falls embryonic agit-pop EP is musically uninspiring but lyrically superb . 

  Sample these few lines from " Destroy Protect And Survive " : " We train young men to drop fire from above/ Yet their commanding officers will not let them write " f-- " on the side of their aircraft/ Because it's obscene . " 

  THE GALLEY SLAVES : I've Come To Kill The President 

  BLAGGERS ITA : God Save The Cockroach 

  The Galley Slaves have the misfortune of hailing from Kew in Surrey . 

  The rather provocative title of their single having failed to garner them an interview with CNN , they have threatened to kill my family if the record is not reviewed here . 

  Nice words , plaintive vocals , dreadful guitar playing . 

  The Blaggers ITA have put out a limited edition one-sided EP of which by far the best track is " It's Up To You " , which features the sampled words of Thomas Mensford ( ex-singer with The Angelic Upstarts and alleged Morrissey mucker ) in which Mensi accurately dissects the filth that is fascism . 

  It's a track that I'd love Morrissey to listen to , stupid wanker . 

  SINGLE ( YOU WO N'T BE HEARING ON THE RADIO ) OF THE WEEK 

  MARXMAN : Sad Affair 

  One of the most disgusting traits exhibited by the liberal is his inability to smell shit when it's under his nose . 

  Thus Brit pop bands have righteously railed again and again against South African or Central American fascism and yet managed to ignore the mess on their own doorstep . 

  Agit-pop records about the north of Ireland are few and far between , most radical acts seemingly all too willing to swallow the " official " British government line -- that both sides are as bad as each other ( they're mad , these Irish ) and that if a few , crazed " terrorists " would just stop murdering people everything would be OK . 

  " Sad Affair " heroically attempts to put the record straight , putting the blame firmly where it belongs , on the real terrorists -- on Britain . 

  Marxman join the ranks of the likes of Hiphoprisy and Consolidated , bands who are bangingly right-on to the hip-ho beat at a time ( as we are constantly being reminded -- YAAAAAAAAAAAAAWN ! ) when to be anything other than either defeatist or mindless is utterly unfashionable . 

  Quite how Phonogram are going to market the band remains to be seen . 

  Suffice to say that the brilliant video ( co-produced by ex- NME er Sean O'Hagan ) has already been banned . 

  vibes 

  SHERMAN AT THE CONTROLS 

  Blinded by the lights and freaked out by the fractals ? 

  Then let Vibes soothe your frazzled retinas in glorious monochrome ! 

  So welcome WHYTE and barking mad THE BLACK DOG . 

  RAISING THE WOOF 

  When it comes to pure techno -- the real deal interplanetary Detroit descendant , that is -- Britain could easily come out with a resounding " nil points " in any metaphysical Eurovision Song contest . 

  Or could it ? 

  Sad-Core may have reduced our status to the sick man of Europe amidst the flourishing electronic dance scenes in Germany , Belgium and Holland , but some excavation reveals an underground whose shockwaves get bigger every day . 

  The Black Dog are at the forefront of a pack which often seems to have no desire to come out of the woodwork . 

  Irdial Records , B12-Musicology and the new Rephlex operation are already major forces but so far remain very much -- to coin Underground Resistance's slogan -- " Music for those who know " . 

  There is a definite air of mystery around The Black Dog -- helped along by the fact that their records have often been near-impossible to find . 

  But now signed to UK techno-pioneer Wayne Archbold's General Production Recordings , EPs like the transcendental " Virtual " are at last starting to intoxicate an increasing number of central nervous systems with their glacial , jazz-tinged tone-explorations . 

  The Black Dog -- Ken Downie , Ed Handley and Andy Turner -- record all their sonic expeditions at the gothic-sounding Black Dog Towers , which turns out to be a terraced house in East London . 

  The three formed around 18 months ago and released a trio of EPs in a thousand pressings each . 

  Apart from the GPR records , The Dog appeared on the much acclaimed ART EP with Kirk DeGiorgio and -- ultimate accolade ! -- released one on Detroit legend Carl Craig's Planet E Label ( " He just came round and had a chilli with us and we sorted it out " ) . 

  Of course , the slothful major labels are now starting to sniff around their hindquarters like the old German shepherd who just woke up . 

  " We just could not find a lot of music we liked when we started so we just thought " let us try and make something we like , " " says Ed . 

  The group are also computer buffs on a mission to not only push out musical frontiers but combine the whole thing into a total multi-media package . 

  The hard reality of limited fun is definitely holding them back , reckons Andy . 

  " But it's got to be done because it's something we really believe in . 

  It's worth the pain , " adds Ken . 

  The Black Dog make music for " chilling out to at home " . 

  They obviously despise hardcore but are not averse to mutating breakbeats . 

  " It's another machine to be used , " says Ed . 

  " You want to reclaim it from the people that have been misused it . 

  That's what we've been doing . 

  There's going to be a lot more ambient-style tracks coming out soon . 

  There's going to be a changing period this year , the end of the hardcore thing to a more responsible techno with a bit more thought . 

  " Just the whole mood at the party . 

  The breakbeats are so aggressive and stupid you feel like a dickhead trying to dance . 

  At least with some kind of trance it's subtle and there's a whole different atmosphere . 

  There is not the aggressive stance . " 

  Computer generation games with The Black Dog 

  GROOVE CHECK 

  VIBES SINGLE OF THE WEEK 

  NEW ELEMENT : The Undertaker 

  YOU CAN usually spot a UK rap production a mile off -- strapped for cash in an inadequate studio , British talent is too often stifled before it can start to grow . 

  But , along with the other twelves in this column , New Element's single spits from the speakers with the sort of beefy sound the UK has always dreamed of achieving . 

  Over a fat bassline and ruff scratching , TSD-1 drawls his lyric in a frighteningly laid-back manner reminiscent of Gang Starr's The Guru . 

  As befits a killer debut , it's a shit-kicking brag that warns competitors not to step to The Undertaker , or face the lyrical consequences . 

  Currently working on new tracks with ace mixer Cutmaster Swift , TSD-1 had better start stocking up on coffins for the sucker MCs -- he's gon na need " em . 

  DADDY FREDDY : Haul And Pull 

  HE'S BACK ! 

  The former holder of the world land speed rapping record ('til Curve's mate JC001 half-inched it ) Freddy's spent the last couple of years in the US working on his next LP . 

  " Haul And Pull " , the first single , is a fine piece of ragga in its LP version but becomes a rabid hip-hop monster in the Bobby Konders remix , complete with new words and a sneering woodwind sample . 

  Out September 7 . 

  PARTY A LA MAIZON ( PLZ ) : If It Ai n't PLZ/ Bad Person 

  PLZ ARE Londoner DJ Pogo and ex-pat US rappers Regi and Fredi , and is a debut for both them and the GFTJ label . 

  Pogo's production is expansive and clear , especially on the slower , more serious " Bad Person " , and the rappers have devised their own slang , too , so repeated listening is encouraged . 

  FGTJ are distributed by Rio , which means this 12i should be available in your local Our Price but will not make it into the independent charts . 

  FORWARD INTENSE : Stated/ Imply The Calm 

  H LYRICAL Son ( the Spokesman ) and DJ Arm hail from North London , managing to distribute their debut 12i themselves after a year on the shelf in search of a label . 

  FI take their cure from Hijack's vocal stylings but do not succumb to the temptation to use lightning-fast beats at every available opportunity . 

  So " Stated " has time to ooze menace from behind a barbed wire fence of a beat and the naggingly familiar sample that punctuates " Imply The Calm " is allowed to weave its hypnotic spell . 

  Intelligent and articulate , FI demand attention . 

  PD3 : Noisy Music Pt II/ Funky Rhymes Funky Style 

  THIS CURIOUS 12i is predominantly the work of Pogo's sparring partner DJ Biznizz , and on " Funky Rhymes ... " the now label-less London Posse drop their only cut so far this year . 

  " Noisy Music " is not the exercise in sirens and backfiring juggernauts the title suggests , but instead is an excellent slice of rare-groove instrumental dance music at a fast rap/ slow house tempo . 

  If you have difficulties getting hold of the record , contact . 

  3:6 PHILLY : Those Flags Offend Me 

  KNOCKING AROUND for a while now . 

  " Those Flags ... " is a wordy and articulate attack on patriotism and mindless devotion to abstract ideals . 

  Turning the British fascist's " there ai n't no black in the union jack " bullshit on its head , 3:6 Philly argue their case over a snappy jazz groove for the original , and rip up Run DMC's " Back From Hell " beats for the " Docta D version " . 

  another strong release . 

  CASH CREW : My In Sense Is Burning/ The Provider 

  BETTER KNOWN to most readers of this paper as the label responsible for Headbutt , Mega City Four , Bizarre Inc and J Saul Kane's various aliases , Vinyl Solution are the UK's forgotten rap indie . 

  Following three ace Gunshot singles , the Portobello Road posse bring you two razor-sharp cuts from a Black British Muslim perspective . 

  " Provider " provides the hardcore noise over some old school samples . 

  HUE ROMANTICS 

  Who wants to be the disco king ? 

  " At the moment there is no icon , there are no pop stars because most people who are involved in dance music are doing it in their back room , we're out to change all that . " 

  Whyte motormouth mainman , Robert Gillama , is in full flow and waxing lyrical about world domination plans for his disco assassins . 

  In an arena where most bands are denied even their 15 minutes of fame , Whyte wants to live forever . 

  In an arena where music is married to a mixing desk , committed to computer and performed through basic PAs , Whyte still toil with bass and drums . 

  " We're very much old school as far as playing's concerned , " reckons Robert . 

  " Technology is there to assist the musician , not take over and dominate . 

  Groups such as N-Joi and Altern 8 use dancers to give their performances a human feel , but what's the point ? 

  Why do not they have a drummer up there and a bass player instead of programming everything ? " 

  Whyte have paid their dues and done their YTS with countless disasters , eventually coming together three years ago with an inventive house interpretation of Jimi Hendrix's " Purple Haze " . 

  The track sank without a trace when their label went under , but undeterred Whyte are back with a new deal on Dieter Meier of Yello's Solid Pleasure Label . 

  Their first offering is " Promises " , a balearic bounder replete with flamenco-fuelled guitars and fey indie vocals . 

  Hispanic house with a sunshine vibe and a Fabi Paras facelift to boot . 

  And Whyte cannot wait to get out there and show the masses just who is behind the latest mover . 

  To hell with anonymity and mystery . 

  Whyte wan na be adored . 

  " I shall tell you something , " gabbles Robert enthusiastically , " There's no-one out there now whose doorstep I'd be willing to kip on just to get their autograph . 

  Ten years ago there was Duran Duran , Spandau Ballet , OK they looked daft and camped it up , but people wanted to talk to them , wanted to see them . 

  There was something both tacky and glamorous about them . 

  Nowadays what have you got ? 

  Who the hell wants to go and see that Trumpton lot or The Prodigy , when you can see them out in clubs off their nut -- it takes all the mystery out of pop culture . " 

  Who wants to be the disco kings ? 

  Whyte do of course . 

  Looking for a cosy doorstep to crash in : Whyte 

  FILM 

  EDITED BY GAVIN MARTIN 

  THE FULL DELMONTE 

  Juice is the directorial debut of ERNEST DICKERSON , Spike Lee's cinematographer and a man with a long-standing desire to portray black urban street life just as it is , as IAN McCANN discovers 

  OUCH ! 

  I retrieve my right hand , or what's left of it , from Ernest R Dickerson's mighty grip . 

  I pride myself on being the hardest man on the planet but Dickerson has just reduced my bones to powder . 

  Is it enthusiasm , a warning , or just uncontrollable strength ? 

  Whatever , it puts you on your guard . 

  With your left hand . 

  Ernest Dickerson is a big , stocky man with a soft , warm voice . 

  If he has been known at all to movie-goers thus far , it's been as Spike Lee's cinematographer : even when Lee's brashness caused you to squirm in your seat , you still have something pretty marvellous to look at , and that's Ernest Dickerson's work . 

  Now he's stepped into the director's shoes himself for Juice , yet another shock story from young black America . 

  You know the drill : ghetto kids , gangs , rap music , crime , with the title drawn from street-slang for authority and male outlaw power . 

  The irony is , Juice could have been the first from the starting blocks , as he explains from an unstreet sofa in a chintz sitting room in Soho's exclusive Hazlitt's Hotel . 

  " My co-writer Gerard Brown and I actually got the idea for Juice about ten years ago . 

  It came out of what we saw going on , the increasing pressure on kids today compared with how it was when we were growing up . 

  We were seeing how it was becoming more dangerous , violent , with the growing presence of guns amongst kids . 

  I mean , when we were growing up , you did not settle anything with a gun , you did it with your fists . " 

  Dickerson and Brown began interviewing kids to find out how they felt about life , pressure and violence , and took the resulting screenplay , " an adult story for kids " , he explains , to several studios and a host of big-name producers . 

  No-one wanted to know , unless they could get rewrites where everyone lived happily ever after and stars of The Cosby Show had the lead roles . 

  " That's why I cast so many unknowns when I came to make the movie , " Dickerson reasons . 

  " They had to be believable as the kind of kids you'd see on the streets , but not on TV . 

  It had to be raw , and anyone well-known would bring luggage to the film . " 

  It's not hard to understand the moneymen's indifference to Dickerson's proposal . 

  This was , after all , a time when black youth movies were Beat Street or Krush Groove , ie about as street as West Side Story . 

  Then came Spike Lee , who shoved through the door left ajar by the commercial success of Eddie Murphy , and suddenly Dickerson was too busy to push Juice ahead of cinematography projects like She's Got ta Have It , School Daze and Do The Right Thing . 

  Surely he felt a modicum of frustration watching the black youth movie take shape until it looked like Juice was an afterthought to Boyz N The Hood . 

  Has he been stung by comparisons between Juice and New Jack City/ Boyz ? 

  " New Jack City came out about a week before we started shooting , and I did not even know what it would look like . 

  I do not think there's a comparison between them . 

  Boyz N The Hood has more of a connection because it is dealing with kids of the same age group , although Juice deals with an entirely different set of issues . " 

  There are easy comparisons : both have kids growing up in the same neighbourhood . 

  Both movies look at the pressures on young black urban males . 

  Both have rappers in lead roles : Juice is like a rap toll-call , with a major part for Tupac Shakur of Digital Underground , and EPMD , Latifah , and members of En Vogue and Naughty By Nature in small parts . 

  Another thing they have in common , sadly , is violence at screenings ; one kid was shot dead outside the cinema on Juice's opening night and it caused distributors Paramount to withdraw advertising for the movie . 

  Hence Juice was probably not as big a box-office success as it might have been , although it did make money . 

  " The press made a lot of people afraid of the movie , " says Dickerson , " and Paramount might have tried to counteract that . " 

  He views the violence as " a Friday night thing " , ie the sort of random trouble that happens all over America . 

  It does sadden him , but he believes that Juice will maybe explain a few of the pressures kids are under . 

  He cites a Brooklyn playground shooting as an example . 

  Two lads were the best of friends , grew up together , and yet one shot the other . 

  In a discussion group at the school concerned , a teacher asked the kids why this should have happened between two friends . 

  Go see Juice , said the kids . 

  Then you shall know . 

  Since finishing Juice , Dickerson has again worked on a Spike Lee movie , this time the Malcolm X biopic . 

  An epic three hours in the director's cut , Dickerson says he's " very proud of the movie . 

  I've wanted to make that film since college " . 

  Dickerson and Lee seem to have been saving Malcolm X up for years ; they were buddies at film school . 

  While Lee's claims on Dickerson are evidently still large , perhaps he'd better look for a new cinematographer now that his old pal has a director's credit . 

  However , when Dickerson says shooting Malcolm X was " like a holiday " , it becomes clear that there's maybe a good reason for keeping his hand in when it comes to his old discipline . 

  That hand is proffered for a farewell handshake , and this time I ask him not to squeeze so hard . 

  Some guys have got too much juice ... 

  JUICE 

  FOUR HARLEM kids get out of bed : the fat one ; the hard one ; the cute one ; the aspiring hip-hop DJ . 

  School beckons but they do not go , preferring instead to hustle girls , steal records and have run-ins with the local Puerto Rican gang . 

  There are pressures to Be Someone , and Q , the DJ ( Epps ) , sees his break at a mixing contest overseen by a decidedly sassy Queen Latifah . 

  But not everyone in the gang has Q's options and inclinations , and the hard one , Bishop ( Shakur ) , decides that the best way he and the guys can prove they've got " the juice " is by robbing the corner store . 

  Deliberately confrontational , Bishop sets up the heist on the same night as the DJ contest . 

  What's more , Bishop is not in it just for the money , he wants to see some blood spilt -- even that of his friends ... 

  Juice is yet another black youth thriller from America . 

  Credible in that the peaceable Q is clearly the character you're supposed to identify with , it becomes , ultimately , very simple . 

  Can Q get to Bishop before Bishop kills everyone ? 

  As a thriller it's reasonably effective , but not as gripping as New Jack City simply because it deals with a more believable situation . 

  All the same , what tips Bishop over the top ? 

  One minute he's an ordinary guy , the next an articled headcase out to kill everyone . 

  Paranoia ? 

  The Government ? 

  Machismo fantasies ? 

  We never really find out . 

  However , the casting excellent , the rap cameos an amusingly mild distraction , and the photography conveys the atmosphere of the locale effectively . 

  It's a shame that it's now become part of a genre rather than the opening salvo it might have been , since Juice now has an air of predictability about it . 

  Three years ago there was hardly a young black cinema at all , now critics are drawing comparisons as if bored with the idea . 

  However , now we're spoilt for choice , it has become clear that Juice is neither the best nor the worst of the genre : less sentimental and powerful than Boyz N The Hood , and far superior to Straight Outta Brooklyn , Juice is still a fair way to spend an hour or two . 

  In deadly Ernest : Juice director Dickerson 

  Young guns : Bishop and Q fight for the right to party 

  NEW DIRECTORS 

  EVERY YEAR the British Film Institute issues a package of British short films by up-and-coming movie-makers , giving you a chance to read for the first time the credits you shall be seeing on Channel 4 in the next couple of years . 

  As usual , this batch has its ups and downs . 

  Notably free of movies on white heterosexual themes , the programme includes Danny Thompson's Public Enemy/ Private Friends , a good-natured if thin Brixton-set comedy about three ranting rap-type youths desperately trying to find their lost ticket to a Public Enemy concert ; Cheryl Farthing's Rosebud , an effective but slightly posey awakening-of-lesbian-desires item with an appealing cast and silly fantasy touches , and Mark Nash's Between Two Worlds , about a gay florist in psychoanalysis . 

  Gillian Lacy and Roberto Mader's Capoeira Quickstep is the most ambitious and also most disappointing of the collection , a " fictional documentary " about the Afro -- Brazilian dance-cum-martial art which sort of spins off from a relationship between a British girl and a Brazilian but meanders somewhat in sub-Terence Davies style without even coming up with much in the way of dance . 

  Ludmila Andrews' Mad , Bad Mortal Beings is about the emotional turmoil of a black woman recovering from a relationship , and Sonali Fernando's Shakti is a brief fable about a trash-collecting Asian woman who sees off a white yob with sort-of magic powers and struts around in funky transformed shoes . 

  None of the films are too long to outstay their welcome , but there are not any real home runs in the batch , which range from the slickly professional ( Rosebud ) to the endearingly rough-and-ready ( Public Enemy/ Private Friends ) . 

  Probably recommendable chiefly to Britflick completists and producers shopping around for cheap talent . 

  THE CUTTING EDGE 

  ICE DANCE queen Moira Kelly would be spinning her way to gold on the padding of daddy's millions if only she could find that elusive partner good enough . 

  Enter ex-hockey star D B Sweeney , rough-edged , cynical , not one to take anything sliding across the rink on his backside . 

  And not exactly the picture of tolerance . 

  Sparks fly as quick as the pirouettes . 

  Straining , successfully , to eradicate any trace of intelligence , Glaser pulls out every stop to rack up his movie to cloying extremes . 

  Yet despite predictability beyond the nth degree and an overload of musical montages , The Cutting Edge is insanely entertaining . 

  Why ? 

  Could it be the dazzling obviousness that these two petulant skaters are , below all that ice , besotted with other , because do not opposites always attract ? 

  Could it be the hysterical over-the-top camerawork , proving any amount of slow-motion and soft-focus still do not actually score as style . 

  Or perhaps it could be the heart-stopping finale where they finally , sorry , break the ice , and after a quick peckeroo execute the near impossible Pamchenko manoeuvre ( basically he grabs her by the feet and spins her in increasing circles , and she prays he does not let go ) . 

  Who knows ? 

  But we do know love will out , and despite a script with the credibility of a Jewish pigfarm , everyone's going to have a brainless Friday-evening time of it getting there . 

  Crap for the whole family to enjoy . 

  NIGHT AND DAY ( NUIT ET JOUR ) 

  BLISSFULLY HAPPY young couple Jack and Julie share a Paris love nest wallowing in minimalist luxury on his earnings from nocturnal cab driving . 

  Daytime shifts on the same taxi are handled by lonely Joseph , who meets Julie one evening and -- this being a French movie -- takes her to bed . 

  Cue oodles of tastefully-lit shag scenes and much sour meditation on the nature of love . 

  Elegant economy would seem to be writer/ director Akerman's fort , framing her fragile menage a trois in the barest surroundings before letting it quietly disintegrate . 

  Yet given the steamy circumstances , this whole shebang seems oddly passionless . 

  Inane adolescent power games are numbly played out , with all the usual navel-gazing and self-justification supplanting any insight or honesty between our irritating trio of protagonists . 

  Minor niggles like how these apparently penniless youngsters can afford hotel rooms every night , or their blatant film-set apartment , are never explained . 

  Akerman's throwaway pseudo-feminist conclusion strains for a progression missing from the drama -- Julie attaining adulthood -- although it might be an interesting bid to reverse the casual sexism of Truffaut's Jules Et Jim , similar in theme , 30 years ago . 

  Even so , in all senses , a very ordinary affair . 

  TV--RADIO 

  PAUL THE OTHER ONE 

  He may not be a rock'n' roll comedian , but TV's Mr Sardonic PAUL MERTON is more than just an ubiquitous face , and ANDREW COLLINS salutes him 

  NICE TO see him , to see him , nice . 

  Paul Merton has the first post-modern catchphrase . 

  " In n it marvellous ! " 

  He's said it about three times , on last year's Channel 4 series Paul Merton The Series , and he grafted it , unnaturally , onto his screen persona very much as an anti-catchphrase , as a joke joke . 

  It's crap . 

  It's far from alternative . 

  It's shallow . 

  But it is forced and that's the point . 

  Hope you're all playing this one at home . 

  Here's a good one . 

  The people who commission comedy for TV and radio need lining up and shooting . 

  BOOM ! 

  BOOM ! 

  So clueless and misguided are these sorry types -- so lacking in insight , intent and , bloody hell , a sense of humour -- that if a great comedy show ever makes it to TV List magazine it can only be DESPITE the pony-tails whose job it is to shepherd these things to a laff-hungry public . 

  Laugh ? 

  I nearly laughed . 

  Paul Merton slipped through the net . 

  Fat , funny , and unfashionably 36 , he is the seasoned London cabaret circuit stand-up it's OK to like . 

  A full 12 years after ditching his civil service day job , TV's Mr Sardonic is a ubiquitous face -- having served his time on springboard improv workshop Whose Line Is It Anyway ? as The Other One ( or John Sessions' bit of rough ) and co-written Julian Clary's Sticky Moments , Merton soon reached the dizzy but inevitable heights of his own Channel 4 series . 

  Post-modern title , recycled stand-up material cleverly " disguised " as the bit in the tobacconist's kiosk , and the usual wacky sketch format lent a healthy continuity by the fact that Merton eschewed the 15-scriptwriters fall-back and wrote the entire series with long-time collaborator John Irwin . 

  Although we conduct our interview in an air-conditioned hole at Paul Merton's spiritual home , Channel 4 , drinking tea from unwieldy tureens , it is the ever-dependable Beeb who have thus far harnessed his slippery talents most deftly . 

  Cult-turned-flagship Have I Got News For You garnered six million viewers this year , a BBC2 chart-topper , and , as Merton observes , " You do not hear a bad thing said about it ! " 

  Played against the fist-faced public school bile of Ian Hislop and genius swagger of Angus Deayton , Merton's deadpan asides , regular flights of insanity and crap T-shirts have earned him a place in our hearts forever . 

  That it is by far the funniest and most essential comedy show on television ( fourth series imminent in October , kids ! ) is a sad indictment , I mean , all that money Roy Clarke earns ... 

  " EEEEEEAAARRH " SAYS Paul . 

  This is the affirmative in the style of a laconic drawl . 

  In daft Magic Roundabout T-shirt and with enough of that stubborn hair to necessitate a hand pushed through it every two seconds , Paul Merton is far from the detached misery he portrays on the box . 

  Since much of Have I Got News For You's allure lies in its overnight topicality , we ponder the speed and efficiency of " sick " jokes in the school playground . 

  From Lesley Wittle to Zeebrugge , it has always been a matter of hours before the first risqu punchline filters in . 

  " Somebody once told me that the network was long-distance lorry drivers ... " ponders Paul . 

  " The joke evolves down the pub in Newcastle , and the lorry driver tells it at a truck-stop and within 24 hours it's all over the country . " 

  In sixth form days , he and John Irwin actually invented a joke in a free period ( " I cannot remember how it went now , something involving a foreskin , no doubt " ) . 

  Eight years later , Paul was sitting in a bloke's house in Wrexham who told him the very same joke ! 

  Merton's written an entirely new set for the Edinburgh Festival , but the last time he did any substantial stand-up was in Australia in'89 . 

  In the interim , has TV taught him anything about comedy ? 

  " Not really . 

  Doing television only teaches you about doing television really . 

  There are traps you can fall into if you do too much television -- although I've been on a lot since'89 , I do tend to turn most things down . 

  The people who are taking over from TVS -- Meridian Television -- are bringing The Dating Game from the States ( a sort of pointless adult Blind Date ) , and they wanted me to host it . 

  But they wanted to do 65 programmes ! 

  Hur hur ! 

  A ) I would not do it anyway , even if they were doing four , and B ) it would be difficult to keep up the quality over 65 programmes ! 

  You'd think " Oh , the 38th one was not quite as good as the 19th ... " 

  Although he's co-presenting BBC's TV Hell ( a dazzlingly obvious three-and-a-half hour antidote to Channel 4's TV Heaven whereby kitsch rubbish is dredged from the archives ) , Paul Merton does not watch much television . 

  His video's broken -- but it does not unduly worry him . 

  " If I saw a comedy show that was very good , I'd get depressed , and if I saw something that was very bad , I'd get depressed . 

  I do not see myself in competition with other comedians , although I am . " 

  Oh yes , there'll be young bucks out there who see you as old and in the way . 

  You may be NEW on telly , but anyone who's followed " the circuit " in London will see your name very much as an old slipper . 

  " Eeeeeeaaahh . 

  Maybe I should go out and abuse some kids , get rid of that " safe " tag . " 

  You're not a rock'n' roll comedian are you ? 

  " What's a rock'n' roll comedian ? " 

  Well , Lenny Bruce , Bill Hicks , Gerry Sadowitz , Rob Newman and Dave Baddiel ... 

  Teenage girls actually scream at Newman . 

  " Screaming at comedy gigs , that's a new one , " he mutters , disapprovingly , " It all sounds a bit like Gary Glitter to me . " 

  DESPITE THE sneer in his Jonathan Ross-like Cockney voice , Merton is clearly a warm and generous human being -- not actually above all this , just sort of beyond it . 

  To one side . 

  When he first started out , he used to wear a pair of very baggy , red striped pyjamas ! 

  They lasted six months . 

  " I had them on one night at the South Bank Poly and I just thought to myself , " I cannot be bothered with this , I really cannot " . 

  If I'd become known as the Man In The Pyjamas , I'd have to wear those pyjamas for the rest of my life ! 

  If I went out at the age of 68 at Drury Lane to celebrate Rory Bremner's 50 years in showbusiness and I had not got my pyjamas on , somebody would shout " Where's your pyjamas " ? " 

  Paul Merton , ladies and gentlemen , boys and girls . 

  Did not he do well ? 

  Paul Merton presents TV Hell on Bank Holiday Monday at 7.30pm . 

  A repeat of Paul Merton The Series and a new series of Julian Clary's Sticky Moments begins on Channel 4 on September 11 . 

  " Would you like a cup of tea , dear ? " 

  TV's own Mr Crap T-Shirt , Paul Merton 

  SOUND AND VISION 

  WEDNESDAY 26 

  STAR TREK plods on . 

  Hurray ! 

  TEENAGE DIARIES is made by Julie , an anorexic . 

  MOJO WORKING looks at those Beelzebubs of boogie , The Rolling Stones . 

  THE 1 FM ROADSHOW comes from Falmouth with Army Of Lovers . 

  More fun is to be had with Sugar in session on MARK GOODIER and HIT THE NORTH has Delicious Monster live plus interviews with Andy Rourke , Happy Mondays and comedian Mark Little ( the one who was in Neighbours ) . 

  THURSDAY 27 

  More MR MAGOO ! 

  TOTP will never end . 

  Nor , hurray , will the repeats of PORRIDGE . 

  MEN TALK lets women talk . 

  It says here . 

  Or there's Goldie Hawn in FOUL PLAY . 

  THE 1 FM ROADSHOW offers us the twin delights of Billy Ray Cyrus and Sinitta . 

  More Sugar in sesh on MARK GOODIER and a Reading preview with Lesley from Silverfish on VIBE . 

  FRIDAY 28 

  SIGNS OF THE TIMES looks at generational conflict re furnishing and pictures of Jesus . 

  WHITNEY HOUSTON is alive and deadly dull , followed by an early Marilyn Monroe , DO N'T BOTHER TO KNOCK , as a barmy baby-sitter . 

  EDINBURGH NIGHTS features a piece called Stevie Wonder Felt My Face . 

  Vincent Price goes spookola in DIARY OF A MADMAN . 

  THE 1 FM ROADSHOW has The Pasadenas and The Christians . 

  JOHN PEEL has Sebadoh and Yardstick in session , while RAVE has XTC , Basil Brush and Brian Cant . 

  Why ? 

  SATURDAY 29 

  Belinda Carlisle and The Notting Hill Carnival star on PARALLEL 9 this merry morn . 

  Richard E Grant is Sherlock Holmes meeting Conan Doyle in the silly ENCOUNTERS . 

  There's a new soap with the excellent title of LET THE BLOOD RUN FREE . 

  VIDEO DIARIES is about Albanian emigre Dr Yili Hasani who is obsessed with Gary Lineker . 

  AGNES OF GOD is a weird movie with Jane Fonda in it and THE GHOST-BREAKERS is a 1940 Bob Hope film . 

  ONE STEP BEYOND MADNESS stars Steve Wright and some Londoners . 

  ANDY KERSHAW has Steve Riley and The Mamou Players and JOHN PEEL has sessions from Mr Ray's Wig World and Half Man Half Biscuit . 

  SUNDAY 30 

  Danny Kaye in ON THE RIVIERA ? 

  THE TRIP TO BOUNTIFUL is supposed to be a neato film . 

  AMAZING STORIES is dafter than ever tonight , being about aliens . 

  DAD is wimpy toss , as these films go , so watch THE DAY OF THE LOCUST and THE BIG KNIFE on MOVIEDROME . 

  THE PARTY IN THE PARK has live music from Del Amitri , The Farm and Status Quo . 

  MONDAY 31 

  THROW MOMMA FROM THE TRAIN is a pretty funny film despite Billy Crystal . 

  Oh God ! 

  The ONLY FOOLS AND HORSES 1986 Christmas Special ! 

  Oh God ! 

  Oh God ! 

  Better watch TV HELL which probably charts the history of bad TV decently but doubtless the BBC will bollocks it up as they always do . 

  Ho hum . 

  Still , they are repeating IT'S A KNOCKOUT . 

  In fact , the whole thing goes on all night and if they can keep down the smarmy comments ( like , we know this stuff if crap , we do not need to be told ) , it could be very good . 

  It all ends at 12.20 am . 

  THE 1 FM ROADSHOW has KWS on it and Elton and Bernie rant on as usual on TWO INTO ONE . 

  Keith Allen presents THE MIX . 

  TUESDAY 1 

  Why not begin the day with SIR JAMES ANDERTON -- MY WAY , and see if he starts wanking on about cesspools again ? 

  STAR TEST is the weird one with Chris Eubank . 

  SLEUTH is on again . 

  CITIZEN SMITH forges on , THE MARY WHITEHOUSE EXPERIENCE is repeated . 

  Some of it is hilarious . 

  And today THE 1 FM ROADSHOW excels itself with Chris De Burgh in Bude . 

  There's also loads of Fringe Bollocks on EARSHOT plus Goodbye Mr Mackenzie in acoustic session . 

  VIDEO 

  FISHBONE : The Reality Of My Surroundings 

  MISLEADINGLY TAKING its title from their latest long-player , The Reality Of My Surroundings is a dazzling history of Fishbone's seven-year career . 

  To its credit , it bypasses biographical thoroughness in favour of a succession of interviews , monologues , home movie clips and promo videos that chart the progress of their eclectic agit-pop in a beautifully quirky fashion . 

  Guitarist Kendall Jones plays the straight man , articulating Fishbone's mix-and-match musical philosophy in earnest , common-sense terms while his colleagues lark about with frantic abandon -- particularly livewire vocalist Angelo Moore . 

  Punctuating the chat is a chronological sequence of the band's vids , which neatly illustrate Fishbone's steady move from scratchy skaa-funk to more MTV-friendly fare . 

  The early efforts are low-budget romps , akin to the kind of shambling college-project material that's usually the preserve of British indie outfits , but things become slicker as the band mature , as evidenced by " Sunless Saturday " -- a cinematic masterstroke that finds Spike Lee adding claustrophobic visuals to a song that embodies the oppressive squalor of Fishbone's native Los Angeles . 

  It's a fast-paced , illuminating and frequently hilarious show , but the portrait is left incomplete by the short shrift given to film of Fishbone onstage -- surely the one place where their controlled chaos makes perfect sense -- and a surprising lack of emphasis on the political apoplexy that makes them so fascinating . 

  Fishbone's Angelo Moore : get " Real " -ity 

  There are 20 spanking new copies of this definitive Fishbone compilation going to the winners of this week's competition . 

  And how much more easy could it be . 

  Just write the name of Fishbone's singer on a postcard and send it to : 

  REELING AROUND 

  Cheers' NORM joins Madness ... 

  Malcolm X -- SPIKE LEE's time-bomb ready to blow ... 

  MADONNA's multi-media money-spinning deal 

  GEORGE WENDT , better known as Norm , barfly supreme in Cheers , joined together with the reformed MADNESS for the pilot of new music programme Spunk recently . 

  Wendt , a noted hardcore fan way back in the days when Nirvana were still a mod band , has been presenting the acts on Saturday Night Live for some years . 

  But Spunk , produced by Initial in conjunction with Go ! 

  Discs , may never actually see the light of day . 

  It's just one of six programmes commissioned by Channel 4 to fill a slot for " an original new music programme " . 

  Censor-taunting MADONNA has got into bed with the censor besieged Time-Warner . 

  Madonna's long awaited multi media entertainment company Maverick , embracing film , books , TV and music publishing , signed a $60 million deal with Warner under a seven year arrangement which , should everyone be happy , can be extended to 11 years . 

  Projects under consideration include James Baldwin's Giovanni's Room and a movie biography of Mexican artist Frida Kahlo . 

  But on the latter , Madonna has been beaten to the punch . 

  ANNABEL SCIORRA will play the Mexican activist artist Frida Kahlo in The Brush Of Anguish , set in the turbulent 1930s and directed by Latino Luis Valdez . 

  Time-Warner are already facing pre-release criticism of SPIKE LEE's Malcolm X and observers reckon the DENZIL WASHINGTON-starring movie may prove to be as incendiary an issue as Bodycount's " Cop Killer " . 

  Lee's proposed opening for the movie , based on a script written by James Baldwin , is an American flag being licked with flames behind a credit sequence until it forms the title X . 

  This is followed by recent contemporary footage such as the Rodney King beating . 

  Rumours abound that Warners will try to persuade Lee , pressured to change the original opening of Jungle Fever , to alter the introduction . 

  Already exhibitors are demanding that Warner Brothers supply extra security for when the three-hour 22-minute , $33 million epic hits US screens in November . 

  Also making a mark with the censors is The Naked Lunch . 

  The David Cronenberg adaptation of William S Burroughs' novel was seized after opening on four screens in the Greek capital of Athens . 

  Authorities claimed it was " inciting young people to engage in homosexuality and the use of narcotics " . 

  Fans of the Rome episode in Jim Jarmusch's Tom Waits-soundtracked Night On Earth will be pleased to know that cab driver ROBERTO BENIGNI , for years a boffo box office certainty in his homeland , will soon be making a revival of Blake Edwards' Pink Panther series . 

  Edwards has signed Benigni to play the illegitimate offspring of Inspector Clouseau in the forthcoming Son Of Pink Panther . 

  IMAX , the large screen format used by THE ROLLING STONES for their At the Max live concert film will open a 500 seater venue on London's South Bank in two years' time . 

  LONG PLAY 

  EDITED BY STUART BAILIE 

  HENRY ROLLINS 

  Deep Throat 

  TO SOME , Rollins is a cartoon character , Captain Testosterone -- the abused child who has over-compensated his way to semi-stardom . 

  To his peers among the hardcore diaspora he is punk rock personified , the noble savage -- poet , performer and publisher , a Nietzschian superman in baggy black shorts and " Search And Destroy " tattoos . 

  But is even the most ardent Rollins wannabe capable of consuming six spoken word CDs ? 

  This curious art-form relies heavily on the performer's strength of personality and Rollins , like fellow spoken-worder Biafra , bulges with chutzpah , charisma and balls . 

  Rollins' forte is the anecdote and the near-hysterical rant and , when he veers too far into the territory of the poet , the philosopher or the stand-up comedian , the results can be a wee bit naff . 

  But Rollins tells a mean story and , godammit , the man can be funny . 

  His penchant for punching people out , his notoriously foul temper , his painful honesty and his excruciatingly rigorous self-criticism combine to make riveting listening . 

  The tale that tickled me most concerns a trip to England -- a country which Rollins caricatures as a pissing-with-rain hell hole populated entirely by spotty Morrissey-worshipping wimps who eat nothing but fish and potatoes smeared with grease . 

  Rollins , the ultimate ugly American , is late for a plane , all the tube trains have stopped running and the only way he can get the London Underground employees to pay him any attention is to scream " THE SMITHS HAVE REFORMED ! " 

  Like many of his anecdotes , the pay-off line is self-deprecating and almost profound and here , I think , lies the secret of Rollins' popularity . 

  He is a scared and frightened child in the body of a beetle-browed body-builder -- a cross between the Incredible Hulk and the hero of Home Alone -- at once both intimidating and endearingly vulnerable . 

  He is able to be painfully honest ( and funny ) about a childhood encounter with a baby raper and the misogyny that resulted from his disastrous teenage sex life -- I mean , this guy would be a superb candidate for Radio 4's In The Psychiatrist's Chair . 

  He makes cutting observations about racism and sexism and then , unfortunately , veers into lame sneer-along homophobia . 

  I do not think I've ever experienced a recording which has so intensely provoked so many of my emotions . 

  Deep Throat is a package not unlike Rollins himself . 

  As large as life and death , both funny and sad -- and not a little dangerous . 

  CRAWLSPACE 

  Sphereality 

  TRASH CAN SCHOOL 

  Sick Jokes And Wet Dreams 

  LONG GONE John , the self-styled " Anti-Mogul/ President/ Swell Guy " behind Long Beach independent Sympathy For the Record Industry , once used to toss his cookie into the lap of any damn intellectual foolish enough to sling the term " free jazz " his way . 

  But perhaps the old goat's loosening up a bit , if Crawlspace's latest slice of free spirit improvisation is any indicator of where LGJ's personal musical taste is heading these days . 

  " Sphereality " was recorded live in concert and finds Crawlspace hanging on to the shreds of their psychedelic shape-shifting strum ( last featured on the 45 they made with Mooseheart Faith ) , only this time they are even more adventurous and what unravels goes far beyond any trip/ trance acid groove . 

  Their rock roots are showing , naturally , but there is also a strong element of free-form experimentation present in their performance . 

  A grinding of creative gears that mushes the marrow from the bones of such legendary leviathans as 13th Floor Elevators , Amon Duul II , Crawlspace have provided Sympathy with its most adventurous release so far . 

  Trash Can School's name suggests that here is a most predictable Sympathy band with lotsa grease'n' grunge'n' rock'n'roll . 

  Well ... 

  Although Trash Can School certainly provide several excellent examples of the genre ( " President Junkie " and " I Want Out " being particularly notable ) that's not all they deliver . 

  Trash Can School have , like Crawlspace , an urge to experiment and tinker with new toys . 

  So while they are happy to hammer out their version of Blue Oyster Cult's " Godzilla " , they are also keen to let rip with " Incinerator " , which boils with improvised noise and twisted , tortured threat . 

  Trash Can School are an astonishing accomplishment . 

  " Sick Jokes And Wet Dreams " belongs next to the Babes' " Fontanelle " and Sonic Youth's " Dirty " in the best rock record of'92 stakes . 

  MONKS OF DOOM 

  The Insect God 

  THE DEMISE of much-missed American loonies Camper Van Beethoven produced , in amoeba-like fashion , two outfits continuing their tradition of semi-psychedelic weird-pop . 

  Frontman David Lowery went on to develop Camper's spiky , satirical side with Cracker , while his colleagues formed the Monks Of Doom , a prolific bunch who've pursued a less-than-earth-shaking career on a series of garden-shed US indie labels . 

  " The Insect God " is a five-track affair that finds the Monks placing predictable emphasis on their fascination with the stranger side of the 1960s : Syd Barrett's " Let us Split " gets a splenetic shot in the arm , there's a hefty dose of home grown acidic madness in the shape of an eight-minute " mini rock-opera " , and proceedings clatter to a close with the chaotic run through The Mothers Of Intervention's " Who Are The Brain Police ? " . 

  It's all good fun , for sure , but without Lowery's unique wit , the Monks sound like a kooky bar band : entertaining , in an inconsequential , drinking-soundtrack kind of way , but hardly worth a second listen . 

  COPPER KILLER 

  SUGAR 

  Copper Blue 

  THE PLAIN facts first : this is the return to centre stage that everyone hoped Bob Mould would make . 

  After the bleak , tortured inconsistency of his last LP , " Black Sheets Of Rain " -- which marked the end of his solo deal with Virgin America and brought the final curtain down on his immediate life , post-Hsker-D -- " Copper Blue " is , without doubt , the dawning of a new era . 

  This is why it's hardly worth going into the ins-and-outs of his previous ( albeit ground-breaking and influential ) outfit here . 

  The days of the Hskers are gone . 

  Both Mould and Grant Hart have put the whole drama behind them . 

  all that needs saying is that Mould is back in a big way ... 

  With a razor-sharp cleaver , a new band , a revitalised , retuned outlook on the unevenness of life . 

  This is Mould , for the first time since his epic " Workbook " album , recapturing his sense of The Definitive : the last word in love songs and the full stop after heartbreak . 

  What's more , " Copper Blue " hammers home the realisation that Bob Mould could be around for years to come . 

  Whereas before his longevity -- in keeping with his apparent state of mind -- was always uncertain and open to question , these days his songs suggest a comparatively stable figure . 

  ( I can imagine people in the future treating Mould like Dylan or Springsteen , except without the references to highways , God or encroaching senility . ) 

  Obviously , his past-history is back in fashion , after the success of Nirvana and the consequent re-investigation of the last ten years of American punk rock . 

  There's an appetite for Mould , which helped sell out his two recent London shows with ease . 

  But rather than simply treading water , the big man has put his stock in the new material -- which is more relevant than nostalgic . 

  Also , this album's on Creation which -- at least until last week -- conjured up an aura of freedom around him . 

  In essence Bob Mould has made a fresh start , even if it's a wary one . 

  You wonder at times if anything is straightforward in Bob's world : does he find popping down the shops for a loaf of bread an emotionally distressing experience ? 

  Can he pick up a tin of beans without feeling that it hates him ? 

  " Copper Blue " is a great jumble of questions and realisations . 

  The now well-honed Mould character traits are everywhere : his underlying cynicism , the ongoing mistrust of people and the bits where his head sounds like it's about to explode . 

  But this time round , Mould is also back on the offensive , following his past , demoralised-sounding work . 

  Virtually every track is a winner , though it's the optimistic ones which shine through initially , like the recent ( prophetic ) single " Changes " with its sinewy lead guitar line , and Side Two's poppy " If I Cannot Change Your Mind " . 

  The latter has a lyric set round an argument which Bob not so much gives in to , but agrees to differ on ... 

  THE SHOCK OF IT ALL ! 

  Bob Mould in a near-forgiving state of mind ! 

  How different is that to his previous passionate vendettas ? 

  Elsewhere , " Copper Blue " is ferocious . 

  Sugar have provided the right vehicle for Mould to tether his current world-view to , providing ( with Mould's guitar and the tightness of the rhythm section ) a set of beautifully hard-knuckled rock arrangements that give him the clout he needs to reinforce the feeling inherent in his vocals . 

  Following the intense intro of " The Act We Act " , the sceptical " A Good Idea " lunges in with a gripping bassline and a teasing stab of guitar . 

  You can imagine Mould in a video for it , taking a flame-thrower to the Garden Of Eden and sitting triumphantly amidst the ashes . 

  There are still glimpses of Mould's feeling of uselessness -- if not with himself , then with his relationship with other people , borne out by the aforementioned " If I Cannot Change Your Mind " and the earlier " Helpless " . 

  He sounds like he's still going through a learning process , coming to terms with the fear of losing friends , and at the same time is worried that he's being misunderstood himself . 

  Check his scorched-earth vocals for the sound of self-doubt . 

  The overall atmosphere is one of unrelenting power , mixed with a critical commentary . 

  Side Two's opener , " The Slim " , typifies Sugar's ability to slow things down , with a grinding , winding melody that backs Mould as he tumbles through a drawn-out flashback nightmare , which makes temporary amnesia seem like a healthy option . 

  Mould , though , goes out with a sly nod towards the future . 

  You can even hear him laugh , before the start of the finale " Man On The Moon " , a grunge-like lullaby that acts as a reassuringly warm , parting gesture . 

  For a man who sounds like he's been to hell and back and been burned along the way , Mould has returned to heal old wounds . 

  With Sugar and " Copper Blue " he's made a great start . 

  POPINJAYS 

  Flying Down to Mono 

  LIKE CARTER , the Popinjays are one of those UK indie turns that have got a liberating blast from the arrival of cheapo , user-friendly technology , turning their intensive sweet-shop dramas into enormo stomping noise-storms . 

  Where there was a danger in the past of them getting tagged as the Talulah Gosh it's OK to laugh with , the Popinjays have packed away their school recorders and become grander , more articulate and sexy than you'd have ever guessed before . 

  When I hear songs like " Sun " and " Snowblind " I get to thinking of Blondie's " Union City Blue " -- the sonic glory and writing confidence , the way a cool verse flips into a tasty bridge and then choruswards , the way that sad words are dropped into an uplifting tune , leaving you moved and confused . 

  The cheery desperation in there . 

  Fair play to Ian Broudie for putting his trademark sparkle on the music and for letting the loony parts lie , the way that " Monster Mouth " is Jim Bob after getting his throat sorted by Tona De Brett , and how the chorus of " Too Jung " is a saucy steal from The Smiths' " London " . 

  Meanwhile , in coversville you have The Mamas And The Papas' " Getting Better " complete with frazzled Brit signature -- now it sounds like it was written with The Bull And Gate in mind ! 

  Down in Mono Valley , you can be sure there are abused kids , sad sweet dreamers , the misunderstood and the distracted -- all huddled under its hazy horizons , but the Popinjays have their own style of empathy and a philosophical get-out line that says " nothing ever goes away , it just becomes before and you shall find it all once more . " 

  Which is sort of comforting . 

  I think . 

  IF THE CAPPUCCINO FITS ... 

  PAUL WELLER 

  Paul Weller 

  HAVING BECOME the Julian Copes of jazz caf soul , The Style Council parted company because their records had become so deranged that no-one could comprehend even the tiniest part of them . 

  Then Paul Weller formed a group with the extraordinarily hopeless name of The Paul Weller Movement ( for someone so fascinated by Englishness , you'd think he'd have noticed the national Jokes About Bowels obsession ) , started performing Jam songs and left Polydor . 

  Now Weller is on Go ! 

  Discs ( aka Fred Perry Records ) and , having dispensed with group names ( never his strongest point ) he has released his debut album , " Paul Weller " . 

  One's first hearing of this album is not a happy event . 

  Those expecting a veering away from the aforesaid jazz caf soul direction will be disappointed ; Weller plays more guitar than before , but it is a sparkly , jazzbo sort of guitar and not feedback mod or anything like that . 

  His voice is still soft and R &amp;amp; B crooning , he still works with Steve White and DC Lee and Mick Talbot gets a writing credit . 

  Galliano are mentioned . 

  Neither are subsequent hearings of this album likely to cause the listener to shout " Christ almighty ! 

  This is the best record ever made ! " -- the songs lack the bursting invention and variation of great pop/ soul/ jazz/ harmonica gumbo or whatever to lift them into that category . 

  But the cynical should be advised ; this is the best thing Weller has done since he binned those awful black-and-white golf shoes and invented frothy coffee . 

  Sure , the references are obvious . 

  " Clues " is Van Morrisonesque , " The Strange Museum " owes a bit to " Ai n't No Sunshine " , " Uh Huh Oh Yes " is very like " Are " Friends " Electric ? " by Soul Brother Number One Gary Numan . 

  Some of the tunes are noodling , familiar and limp rather than languid . 

  Lyrics like " Who am I ? 

  What am I ? 

  Where am I to go ? " and song-titles like " Kosmos " and " Into Tomorrow " are meaningless to all but the author . 

  Everything else , whoever , is fine . 

  " Bullrush " and " Remember How We Started " are swirling , finely balanced mixtures of the delicate and the insistent ( and " Bullrush " has this great stupid bit nicked off " I Am The Walrus " ) . 

  Most things are played with conviction , most things have neat tunes and , although nothing ever leaps out and changes your life " Paul Weller " is a decent record for a bastard hot sticky day . 

  Bring on the Pimm's and let us have a sing-song around the old Hammond because Paul Weller is back . 

  Nearly , anyway . 

  His Perryness Saint Paul of Woking 

  EUGENIUS 

  Oomalama 

  GIVEN THEIR previous , borrowed moniker , it's hardly surprising that Captain America's chosen brand of guitar fury bows to bands both ancient and new . 

  If you're looking for ground-breaking mayhem , you got off at the wrong Greyhound stop . 

  It's ironic that fuzzified guitars have -- somehow -- become a symbol of comfort in these " alternative " times , but that's the way the digestive dissolves , and that's why " Oomalama " is as instantly familiar as last night's curry . 

  As immediate as a kick in the shins . 

  With the likes of Ministry marching over the hairy horizon , Eugenius and their casual like are virtually being pushed towards the mainstream . 

  So " Oomalama " is slightly sloppy , moderately poppy and , on the " thank you " rollcall , credits " peanut butter and honey sandwiches " . 

  Sweet ? 

  Hell , you have not heard " Down On Me " ... 

  It also rolls along with a breezy swagger which belies The Vaselines' ( Eugenius' previous incarnation ) shambling status while suggesting that , actually , this guitar-pop malarkey is a piece of piss . 

  What it lacks is diversity , drama and pained desperation . 

  Fundamentally , comparisons crucify Eugenius in the sense that Pavement , Mercury Rev , Unrest et al are pushing out the boat , the train and any passing planes , while Eugenius , erm , are not . 

  " Breakfast " and " Here I Go " are just two examples of the quartet's regimental inspiration , and Eugene Kelly's vocals are rarely elevated above the pathologically dour . 

  Excepting the sleazy schmooze that is " Hot Dog " , " Oomalama " lacks light and shade and the sense of abandonment that transforms a collection of good songs into a great album . 

  But to disqualify Eugenius from the running is to ignore the twanging power inherent in " Flame On " ; to pass over Kelly's weary woefulness ; to turn a blind ear to the plethora of lovely guitar flicks and calmly-slashed chords which litter " Breakfast " and " Buttermilk " like mouldy cabbages down Walthamstow High Street on market day . 

  You will also be overlooking some nonchalantly sly snippets of humour : the sleeve of " Oomalama " features half a dozen plastic animals . 

  Why ? 

  As Eugenius would probably say themselves , does there have to be a f--ing reason ? 

  Run-of-the-mill , but still running ... 

  Nothing compares ... 

  Eugene 

  STARLINGS 

  Valid 

  CHRIS SHEEHAN used to be a heroin addict . 

  I know this from an absurdly melodramatic press release . 

  You will know it from lyrics that dwell on " the final kill , the final thrill " , titles like " Shoot Up Hill " ( a real place , in Kilburn , irony fans ) and a cute little skull-and-crossbones on the packaging of " Valid " . 

  Now Chris Sheehan , pivotal Starling , is an ex-user , and he's clearly become psychologically dependent on using music as a cathartic way of coming to terms with his past . 

  That means grimy super-realist lyrics rendered on the wild side in a predictably debauched drawl ; sparse , uneasy music pricked by the ghosts of previous drug mythologists Lou Reed , Nick Cave , Nico and The Jesus And Mary Chain ; and the mix of self-pity and " you do not know how hard it was " self-righteousness peculiar to cleaned-up addicts . 

  Is not it time ex-junkies found new forms and a new vocabulary to celebrate their survival ? 

  Evidently not . 

  That said , about half of " Valid " is as broodingly successful as most examples of this low-life love/ hate genre go . 

  " Now Take That " is a clanking , menacing collection of threats that stalks in the footsteps of Nick Cave , while " Unhealthy " is a thumping and insistent piece of blues-spooked vitriol . 

  And though previous Starlings singles were pretty much pallid takes on the Mary Chain's one wonderful trick , the screwed-up-sex prowl of " Sick Puppy " radically twists -- and improves -- on old attempts by pushing the ominous bass and sliding beat upfront and not really bothering with guitars at all . 

  Nasty , but neat . 

  There are , of course , moments like " Shoot Up Hill " that make you wish the NHS paid for and hygienically destroyed " Been there -- done that -- got it out of my system in the studio " bouts of maudlin croaking . 

  But then again , I guess a half-successful " Valid " is better than a f--ed-up invalid . 

  " Drugs ? 

  Me ? " 

  Starling Chris Sheehan 

  THE COAL PORTERS 

  Rebels Without Applause 

  RICKENBACKER REBEL and ex-Long Ryders leader Sid Griffin rides back into town with his latest wild bunch The Coal Porters right behind him . 

  Sid's the kinda hombre who does not climb down from his saddle just to pander to the latest flight of fancy that the LA music scene has retched up , far preferring to follow his own happy trail . 

  He sticks to his guns and , for that reason alone , deserves a tip of the ten-gallon hat . 

  His Coal Porters band ( a terrible pun of a name , but one that will be remembered because of it ) are unashamedly traditional in a rock'n' roll clubland sense . 

  Expect much slick guitar , expressive backbeat and ... the occasional big surprise . 

  " Stealin' Horses " pops out of nowhere and hangs in the air , a skeletal ballad from Griffin with the accompaniment of a ghostly piano which can be heard weeping softy to itself in the basement . 

  It's another side to The Coal Porters' sound and Griffin's songwriting that shows they have more than one ace hidden up their sleeves . 

  " Stealin' Horses " hints at Sam Peckinpah heroics , of McGuinn's " Chestnut Mare " after the buzzards have got at it , and the powerful western writings of Cormac McCarthy . 

  The rest of " Rebels " can be described as being honestly enjoyable , perhaps more fun to experience live in suitable company rather than tracking through it alone at home . 

  BACK TO THE PLANET 

  Earzone Friendly 

  Live Vol 1 

  YOU WANT indie ? 

  You got it . 

  Independently distributed -- by the post office -- these mail-order cassettes are currently your only way of investing in the counterculture's Next Big Thing . 

  SE13's feisty and fabulous Back To The Planet are the Radical Dance Faction it's OK to like , a likeably ramshackle collective whose penchant for ska rhythms and reggae upholstery ought to merit them little more than outlaw status . 

  That their only recorded material is in rattly old tape format will no doubt unsettle the media-literate , fast-lane " indie " kid of today . 

  Plus , their lifestyle decisions are defiantly made under the army surplus banner we cleverly call Crusty . 

  How much more wrong could Back To The Planet be ? 

  And yet ... 

  Back To The Planet are right . 

  Already old pals to a legion of live fans , it will not be long before they're as big as The Levellers , except they will be excellent as well -- catchy , bright , funny , infectious , everything The Levs are not , really . 

  And who knows , perhaps a record company will sign them ! 

  Meantime , the sadly two-year old recordings on " Earzone Friendly " will be your cassette pet . 

  This cut-price item contains BTTP's one confirmed classic , " Daydream " , the inspired job over the top of Eric Satie's " Trois Gymnopedies " , and a perfect introduction to vocalist Fil's charming , untutored tones . 

  She switches between spoken word , shouting through a megaphone with a sock in it and chirruping like a sweet but overexcitable nightingale , tracing a lineage back to Delta 5 , The Raincoats and The Slits ( marvellous days I can assure you ) . 

  Fil sounds a lot like you'd expect the bulimic nutcase daughter in Mike Leigh's Life Is Sweet to sing , she's got an echo box and she's gon na use it , and her slightly amateurish technique is BTTP's trump card . 

  Let us leave the " great voice " of Anita Baker and her ilk to dorks like Nicky Cambell while we celebrate the cracked and the imperfect . 

  Elsewhere , on less poppy and more overtly naive-political tracks like " Rubb In The Cream " and " Let Our Roots Breathe " , the order of the day is a kind of diet dub , which only gets overbearingly Brockwell Park on the rather trad " Sunshine " . 

  As an " album " , this small-scale , big-hearted seven-song companion is a lot less weird and grimy than last year's " Warning The Public " , but an essential thing nonetheless . 

  The threateningly titled " Live Vol 1 " is easier to live without unless you're a small convert already . 

  Recorded last year in Nancy , France and London , England , its nine tracks are invigorated by their environment -- especially such worn-in faves as the fierce , questioning " London City " and the commandingly swirly " You're The Judge " -- but the crowd noises are infuriatingly badly mixed in , making for an imperfect peep into BTTP's spiritual home . 

  It's got " Daydream " on it , though . 

  Every Back To The Planet product will have " Daydream " on it if I am in charge . 

  Send off for it anyway ! 

  I am backing Back To The Planet because when you play their tapes on your Walkman it makes you give money to tramps . 

  Absolutely true . 

  Tapes available from BTTP , address omitted 

  BTTP's " untutored " Fil 

  SHORT CIRCUIT 

  KD Lang in the charts ! 

  Billy Ray goes Top Five ! 

  Is C&amp;amp;W as weird and as rubbish and as world-threatening as all this ? 

  STU BAILIE checks out the record shelves for oddball varieties of cowboy junkies , Tex Mex , hat acts , Canuck contenders and pony-tailed gits , and finds a couple of decent records 

  FLACO JIMENEZ : Partners 

  FLACO HAS been involved in some fun collaborations over the last couple of decades -- his trembling accordion signature on Ry Cooder's " He will Have To Go " and the peppy bits on Dwight Yoakam's " Streets Of Bakersfield " are two good examples . 

  This record is a kind of respect-is-due gesture -- a splurge of celeb guests , a handful of Jimenez relatives and a smattering of loopy polkas to show Flaco off as more than just another name on the studio credits . 

  Consequently , there's a chummy atmosphere on the record that may not always result int he most demanding , creative working mood , but there's a fond , happy ambience in the grooves which ai n't bad . 

  THE PAINE BROTHERS : Honky Tonk Hall 

  LAST TIME I meet Bobby Paine was in a hotel room in Milwaukee at 3am , when myself and Brian Setzer were playing indoor golf , drinking a bit and listening to Bobby tell his mad stories about Jerry Lee , Billy Idol and sundry LA psychos -- barmy late-night company ! 

  Now that Brian is back with The Stray Cats , bassman Bobby has teamed up with his producer brother Larson and has recorded a collection of rockin' tunes that's fairly decent in a Dwight Yoakam sort of a way . 

  A few of the songs here appeared on Setzer's " The Knife Feels Like Justice " records , but this new LP is still probably worth checking out for the rumbling " ( Do not Sell My Daddy ) No More Whiskey " . 

  BLUE RODEO : Lost Together 

  DULLARD COUNTRY Joes from Canada who've got nothing fresh to add to the runnings -- just a stinky , laboured , rock-heavy thing . 

  " Western Skies " , they say , is about taking acid and climbing the local mountains . 

  All I can say about that is that it must have been awfully feeble acid to make your visions come out so pedestrian as this . 

  CLINT BLACK : The Hard Way 

  THE DIFFERENCE between regular country acts and their rock'n' roll equivalents is that your NME -friendly guitar-basher enjoys and is expected to try out new riffs , to be playful and weird . 

  The country industry , though , likes its stars to be constant and orthodox . 

  Like Clint Black . 

  With " Killing Time " in'89 Clint was a thrill , a new voice , a more grainy version of that rich young smiler , Randy Travis . 

  But " The Hard Way " is the third version of that record , and you feel a little frustrated . 

  A dead good singer , but , alas , no different from the way he was before . 

  IRIS DE MENT : Infamous Angel 

  YES ! 

  PASSIONATE songs and groovy diversions and a voice that cracks and soars and makes you aware of the rich possibilities of your lot , instead of burying your feelings in a horrible , orthodox genre . 

  Iris has a raw style that ancestral artists The Carter Family would recognise instantly , and a facility for a great story song that never makes you feel insulted or nauseous . 

  Expect to hear lots more about Iris in the next year ,'cause she's better than a million of those smug Nashville fat-cats . 

  MARY-CHAPIN CARPENTER : Come On Come On 

  JIM LAUDERDALE : Planet Of Love 

  STACY DEAN CAMPBELL : Lonesome Wins Again 

  THE SORT of things that puts The Late Show set into raptures ; politely rocking , coffee table country with " searching " lyrics and nice tunes . 

  However , here at icon-torching , father-I-want-to-kill-you NME Towers , much of that received wisdom and fussy boogie will not wash . 

  Mary Chapin does a version of Lucinda Williams' " Passionate Kisses " that's a certified snore . 

  Jim Lauderdale is like a neutered Dwight Yoakam , though his tribute to George Jones and Gram , " The King Of Broken Hearts " suggests he could be exciting if he loosened up a taste . 

  Stacy Dean Campbell has the most pluck of all , a nice tonsil-trembling way that's a bit like baby Elvis . 

  Dull songs all round , though . 

  CALVIN RUSSEL : This Is Your World 

  A TEXAN dude that's big in France and Germany , apparently , but this record ai n't gon na light up the rest of the west with its plodding , straight-forward observations and predictably worn voicebox . 

  Also , a wimpy , terror-free version of " All Along The Watchtower " is the most superfluous thing you shall come across . 

  RODNEY CROWELL : Life Is Messy 

  SOMETIMES HIS songs are great , elsewhere he's a bit dull . 

  This time Rodney , a vet from the early Emmylou Harris days , teams up with Steve Winwood , Marc Cohn , Don Henley and Barry Beckett to make a record that tends towards a generic West Coast feel in bits , but also has that Springsteen-goes-broody vibe , which is sort of rewarding . 

  LOS LOBOS : Kiko 

  A REALLY fine record that shows Los Lobos in a versatile , soulful mood -- miles clear of the workaday bar-room vibe that sometimes muddies up their live shows . 

  The mix of keening voices , dreamy storylines and unusual , far-off sounds brings to mind The Band when they were on a roll , and David Hidalgo in particular sounds like he's done his best ever work -- conjuring up old ghosts and loser friends and working up a deal of sadness and unique moods from familiar instruments . 

  This is the kind of record that people will talk about in five years' time . 

  " Remember that brill Los Lobos record from'92 that nobody bought ? " they will say . 

  Do not be left out of the conversation , duende ! 

  GRAM PARSONS : Warm Evenings , Pale Mornings , Bottled Blues 

  GRAM WAS a good-looking wastrel rich boy , reared in Georgia , who hung out with the Stones , played with The Byrds , discovered Emmylou Harris and released some glorious records -- pioneering , sad-woozy tunes that have left their influence on " Let It Bleed " , " Dixie Narco " , " The Rockingbirds " and with soon-to-be-popular Def American band The Jayhawks . 

  Some of Gram's classic tear-in-my-beer stuff was clearly inspired by crooner George Jones , but the best of his songs are delivered with a shiver in the throat -- as with Hank Williams and Jimmie Rogers , you could practically hear the hell-hounds on his tail as he addressed old girlfriends , southern vistas , and rotten townships and morbidly looked forward to his own druggy demise . 

  This Australian CD is a class introduction to Parsons and his time , from his homespun days with The Shilos , through to the genesis of country rock and closing on some hard-to-get live takes , plus a few epics from " Grievous Angel " -- his final , whacked-out testimony . 

  It's a great introduction and , combined with the two-on-one US import of " GP/ Grievous Angel " CD , it lets you hear how profoundly moving country music managed to get 20 years back . 

  VARIOUS : Tombstone After Dark 

  OUT FOR a while now , but still worth your attention due to the diversity of ace music on this sampler . 

  Jimmy Dale Gilmore is wild and wiggly , Nanci Griffith is captured in her old folksy form and Percy Sledge sings a Hank Williams tune -- just to remind us that country music is not simply a WASP-y preserve . 

  David Halley's " Further " is lovely and introspective and Junior Brown is a gas ; surreal honky tonk with the boomiest voice you shall hear these days . 

  Altogether it's a feast of credible , left-field acts . 

  UNCLE TUPELO : March 16-29 , 1992 

  PRODUCED BY Peter Buck , which ai n't such a recommendation in itself , since an REM by-line has as much rarity these days as a Steve Albini credit or the legend " from Seattle " , but Uncle Tupelo are pretty magnificent , as it happens . 

  The shaggy , grungy side of the band has lessened under Buck's custodianship , replaced by the bluegrass axis of banjo and fiddle on a burning version of The Lovin' Brothers' " Atomic Power " . 

  Elsewhere , like on " Criminals " or " Shaky Ground " , you get all the weird , unresolved chording that Michael Stipe favours , and a suitably battered vocal that reaches back to the old mountain music and forward to Dinosaur Jr , Lemonheads and Nick Cave . 

  Uncle Tupelo seem to have left their obsession with liquor abuse to the side ( " Moonshine " is an exception , perhaps ! ) , but the result is a strong , indie-friendly creation that can sit proudly with all those rowdy long-hair platters . 

  Enjoy ! 

  BILLY RAY CYRUS : Some Gave All 

  ON YER way Billy , and take yer stinky-winky record with ya ! 

  There he is , old dog-face Cyrus on the cover , with his pony-tail and his stars'n' stripes patch on his jeans -- every inch the puko , ambitious newboy gunning for the hearts and wallets of Codger County and toting a cheesy , materialistic brand of self-belief . 

  The voice is a stinker and the sincerity meter rarely twitches over the course of this , then there's a cover of " These Boots Are Made For Walkin' " that hums to the heavens . 

  Billy Ray is the culmination of the Garth Brooks trend , the triumph of marketing and conservative panty-waist over the music . 

  Clint Black : tuned in to the repeats 

  Gram gets his chips in International Submarine Band days 

  Los Lobos : Kiko' conspiracy 

  Billy Ray Cyrus : Wanker ! 

  Wanker ! 

  Wanker ! 

  Wanker ! 

  NME GIG GUIDE 

  NIRVANA , THE WONDER STUFF and PUBLIC ENEMY top the bill at the 20th Reading Festival on August Bank Holiday Weekend . 

  Also featured on the main stage are . 

  Single day tickets priced 20 and three day tickets priced 65 will be available on site . 

  Fans should note that single day tickets do not include camping and car parking . 

  BABE ALONE'S BURNING 

  From the Blake Babies to " Hey Babe " , JULIANA HATFIELD has been crafting a deceptively sweet , unnervingly direct antidote to foxcore screaming . 

  DELE FADELE gets some long-distance information 

  Juliana Hatfield might not be a gender warrior or fight city hall , but distances herself from the herd of two-bit supposedly alternative US bar-bands by being outwardly conservative and inwardly maverick . 

  While most of her peers wear their hearts on their sleeves and parade their differences by churning out variations on the boss sound of the day , this Boston-based denizen sculpts seemingly light and sweet guitar-pop tunes that have spikes of anger and disenchantment buried deep inside them . 

  The break-up of her former group , the medium-profile Blake Babies , has left her free and unshackled on her first solo LP ( the riveting " Hey Babe " ) to create music that shares subject matter with " soul " -- love viewed from every possible angle -- but blossoms with a fiery individuality born from experience . 

  The biggest mistake you could make about Juliana would be to label her " Babe " and only take her seriously on a superficial level . 

  Sure , she does not scream with anguish and caterwaul and present a screwed-up persona like some " foxcore " groups we could name , but she's quite comfortable being a woman and there should be as many ways for women to express themselves as there are grains of sand on a non-radioactive beach . 

  " Hey Babe "'s strength is in the unnerving directness of the songs , the range of the guitar figures and the simplicity of the everyday language . 

  ON THE transatlantic phone from a Dallas hotel room where she's having a rest from touring America as support to the Lemonheads , Juliana is often forthright and sometimes evasive , giving short , sharp answers to my silly questions . 

  Even though she's not here in person , her personality comes across in terms of someone who knows exactly what she's doing and is strong in her views . 

  The light , fragile voice which is not that dissimilar to the one showcased on more acoustic numbers might suggest shyness , but you can never predict what she's going to say next . 

  I certainly did not expect her to actually complain about the LP she's supposedly promoting . 

  " I just know that next time I can do a lot better , " she confesses . 

  " Hey Babe " was very rushed , there was not much time . 

  I did not have much confidence , so it's kinda weak , but I like it . 

  What I do is not singing about myself , I kinda make up these little stories , I do not know where they come from ... 

  I am not as pathetic as the protagonist in those songs . " 

  Juliana Hatfield , in an ideal world , would be one of the candidates for courtship by the major labels in America who think nothing of offering the noise-for-noise sake Helmet half a million dollars to ditch an indie label for the big-time . 

  At least she will do something positive and enrich the lives of thousands , not just torture people with guitars . 

  Is she aware of the state of play ? 

  " It makes me feel good to know that people want to hear my kind of music , the type of music I think is good . 

  But then , I feel bad for those people who want to stay independent ,'cos it's harder and harder to stay that when all the labels are being bought up . 

  I want to reach a larger audience : I've already made five records on indies , so maybe it's time to move on , but some younger bands are gon na find themselves pushed into the limelight when they're not ready . 

  They might just blow it , and make the whole scene look bad . " 

  The pronouncement of big statements is anathema to Juliana because she feels her point of view changes from time to time and she's afraid of saying too much in case she alienates people , but she does admit to finding life in America " scary " at the moment . 

  " I am definitely getting sick of writing silly love songs . 

  There's only so many love songs you can write . 

  I am starting to write about other things , but I am being careful about writing political things'cos it's really easy to sound preachy or too self-righteous in a song . 

  I do not want to f-- up my music by being too political . 

  I do not feel I have a responsibility to do that with my music . 

  If I wan na be political , I shall do that in my personal life , I do not see why I have to do that with music . " 

  When I wrote " Nirvana " , it was just supposed to be this positive thing about a song that made me wan na go and live , not really a political thing , like you say someone might hear that and go out and try to change things . 

  That could be dangerous , like people are saying heavy metal music might make people wan na go out and kill others ... " 

  The killer would have to be unbalanced mentally prior to hearing the music . 

  " Yeah , I suppose music cannot make you go pick up an axe . 

  Music is good . 

  I like music . " 

  SOME PEOPLE do not . 

  And they do not know what they're missing . 

  Juliana played bass on the recent Lemonheads LP and Evan Dando has returned the favour by guesting on some " Hey Babe " tracks ; she says they like making music together but she could not be a Lemonhead , she wants to be herself . 

  Let us hope she continues to stun us by doing just that . 

  " And hey , do not call me babe ! " 

  Juliana Hatfield lays down the line down the line . 

  NOT FAD AWAY 

  Are the NEW FAST AUTOMATIC DAFFODILS the last living band in Manchester ? 

  Is not it time they gave up the game and settled into cosy , post-stude domesticity ? 

  Or is new single " It's Not What You Know " their finest , most focused outburst of angular funk yet ? 

  Our man in court STEPHEN DALTON puts the case for and against to FAD-head ANDY SPEARPOINT . 

  Knuckling under : STEVE DOUBLE 

  Wagnerian storm clouds gather doomily as millions of curious souls cram themselves into the multi-tiered arena of the High Court in downtown Afterlife City . 

  It is Pop Judgement Day , with every group in history dragged into the dock to justify their past existence . 

  Rapidly shaping up as today's main event are the Madchester show trials . 

  Cowering before a stone-faced jury is Andy Spearpoint , lyricist and singer with the New Fast Automatic Daffodils , attempting to explain why his gang of rhythmic misfits really needed to foist their multi-tentacled percussion patchworks onto a world already over-run with pop music in all its myriad hybrid strains . 

  Well , young man ? 

  " Erm ... we were uncompromising . 

  It depends who's make the judgement , really . 

  Does God like The Smiths ? " 

  He or she would be a narrow-minded twat not to , but such evasiveness does not help your case . 

  How would you answer charges that the New FADS were awkward , slate-grey , repetitive , charmless , self-indulgent , unfocused and dour pedlars of overly cerebral geography-student wank-noise with all the personality of a high-rise car park ? 

  " I probably would not bother . " 

  Objection , your honour ? 

  IN FACT , Pop Judgement Day hit Manchester years ago , but its effects can still be felt here today . 

  Spanking new trams may circumnavigate the bizarre architectural eyesore of Piccadilly -- half Bulgarian showpiece plaza and half Gerry Anderson-style spaceport -- but musically the city is in disarray . 

  Several of its most famous names decamped to London , as did half of Factory . 

  Many small labels have sunk without trace . 

  Big record companies no longer send massed talent scouts here and -- judging by Terry Christian's depressingly banal pop column in the Manchester Evening News -- they are not exactly missing out on buried treasure . 

  Even Factory's semi-legendary Dry 201 bar looks pretty ordinary this Friday afternoon , a solitary 808 Statesman huddled glumly amidst the sparse clientele . 

  New FAD Andy puts down his Guardian crossword , sinks his whiskey and suggests relocating to a Real Ale put he knows on the city centre's crumbling outskirts . 

  Formed at college , where Andy studied drama , the FADs are not local lads . 

  The singer was brought up in London , but two years in Leeds and five in the North West have given him an oddball Midlands-tinged accent . 

  Regional roots aside , the band always wisely distanced themselves from the now-dead scene -- but , as Andy candidly remarks , " everybody said that , did not they ? 

  That was the great thing . 

  The whole stereotype was a media creation anyway , so nobody in their right mind could claim to represent the Manchester scene . " 

  The evil media did not exactly rape poor innocent Manchester and its defenceless young pop stars -- the whole shebang was a two-way transaction of mutual favours . 

  As Andy admits : " It certainly did not do us any harm . 

  We got attention straight away , we got some kind of profile very easily . 

  But we do not particularly regret that the media hype has gone . " 

  No , because maybe even now we can credibly describe the latest New FADS single , " It's Not What You Know " -- their first in almost a year -- as their finest and biggest yet , with Andy yelping sourly across a cavernous chamber of whirling percussive dislocation . 

  Perhaps even comparisons with Joy Division's bruising basslines and the dry crunchiness of early , burly Happy Mondays might be permissible ? 

  " That's what we always were anyway , loud guitars and plenty of rhythm . 

  So , on that extremely simplistic level , we were the Happy Mondays , ha ha ! " 

  Ha ha ha ha ha pardon ? 

  " ... 

  Except with louder guitars . " 

  THOSE GUITARS have been pretty quiet since October last year , when the lackluster " All Over My Face " sank with scarcely a ripple . 

  Since then the group have changed management , written loads of chunky new tunes and recorded their mighty second LP , " Body Exit Mind " , in Brussels . 

  Producer for both the new single and October-scheduled album was Craig Leon -- he of numerous Fall credits -- who has finally managed to capture the beefy FADS live sound on tape . 

  " With " All Over My Face " we went for a rather professional production , " sighs Andy . 

  " It was not a particularly good song and it just sounded really ordinary . 

  It was bollocks , basically . 

  We knew we could do better than that , so we just decided to take the time and not put anything out we were not happy with . " 

  However , anyone attempted to interpret Andy's vitriolic sneering in " It's Not What You Know " as his reaction to a year of bitter wrangling and stifled potential should think again . 

  Such stroppiness would have amounted to commercial suicide after ten months of silence . 

  " It's not as literal as that , it's actually quite an old song . 

  It was not supposed to be saying " we've been really hard done by and you're all bastards " , or anything like that . 

  If it was , that would probably be the last nail in our coffin . 

  A lot of the motivation for the lyrics is the nastier side of my mental make-up anyway . 

  Because the music is fairly hard , it lends itself to expressions of anger and bitterness and violent feelings rather than blissed-out loveydovey stuff . " 

  Nevertheless , the single is a departure in its directness and coherence . 

  Whilst the FADS of old went in for five-man random obscurity and " playing bizarre rhythms as fast as possible " , their forthcoming album boasts structure , recurring themes and even the odd polished pop song . 

  But when one track came dangerously close to being " rompalong , knees-up , power-pop anthem " the band quickly sabotaged it by sticking " a cheesy drum machine behind it and turning the last two minutes into a total sonic attack " -- much to the tearful bewilderment of their paymasters , left-field Belgians Play It Again Sam . 

  For these lads , alas , are archetypal male stude-rockers who hate bubblegum pop and worship Captain Beefheart . 

  What if they accidentally gave birth to something as gorgeous and life-affirming as Betty Boo's " Where Are You Baby ? " would they let this deformed abomination live ? 

  " If we thought it had something genuinely good about it , yes , but a lot of stuff is catchy and commercial because it sounds enough like everything else to be unchallenging and throwaway . 

  You do not have to like it in ten years " time . 

  The aim is to make something people can instantly get excited about but which also stands up to close analysis in terms of being musically interesting and having some kind of content and meaning ... " 

  Yawn yawn . 

  Say something outrageous or shut up . 

  " Most music today is bollocks . " 

  Snore snore snore . 

  Why are you even in a band ? 

  " Erm ... 

  I am just going to the bog . " 

  GEORGE ORWELL claimed writing was a curse and nobody should take it up unless driven by inner demons . 

  Clive James suggested awarding government grants to people for not writing novels in a world already saturated with books . 

  Andy is healthy , happily married and admits being in his band means simply " running a small business " . 

  So are the New FADS really motivated enough to justify their valuable shelf space in rock's great library when Pop Judgement Day comes around ? 

  " Definitely . 

  The fact that it does not cause you immense emotional pain does not mean you're not committed to it . 

  And in the context of what's around , I think we are doing something worthwhile . 

  We have an uncompromising attitude sadly lacking in a lot of what's coming out at the moment , which is partly to do with not being 18 or 19-year-olds who were really into something that happened fairly recently , whose major motivation is to try and copy that somehow . 

  Being married , of course , Andy is presumably not in a group to pull birds ? 

  " No , and just as well really because we have a marked lack of success in that area ! 

  Ha ha ha ! 

  It's really nice being spared that motivation . " 

  But surely Andy is just too sensible and balanced to belong in rock'n' roll ? 

  " Not really , I get too excited about it . 

  You cannot beat playing a gig , you get such a buzz off it . 

  I do not feel balanced when we play live . " 

  Hmmmmm . 

  Taking into account the thundering magnificence of your new single , the jury must grudgingly return a verdict of not guilty . 

  Case dismissed . 

  Andy Spearpoint and those FAD bastards break out of the Manchester doldrums to storm the Palace 

  LIVE 

  EDITED BY STEVE LAMACQ 

  THE CHERRYS 

  " THIS ONE's for all the people in the audience who are gon na talk to me after the show , " beams singing Roger Daltrey lookalike Jonti . 

  " It's called Foxy Lady . " 

  Ha ha ha ! 

  Who says the age of irony is dead ? 

  Not the cheery Cherrys : they are frothing pop in full , rampant effect . 

  With a smile that could melt a nun's heart ! 

  So the dungaree'd bassist should be in EMF : so the woolly-hatted guitarist belongs in the Washington DC scene ; so the stand-up drummer recalls King Bloody Kirt at their prime . 

  So The Cherrys are a colour-crazed collision between dozens of cultural juggernauts on the freeway of pop . 

  With stars'n' stripes boxer shorts worn on the outside . 

  Who do you love ? 

  The Cherrys kneel at the altar of the Chili Peppers and bare their bellies for a spot of sacrificing . 

  The bass is more funky than a fridge full of Earth Wind And Fire remixes . 

  Jonti jumps about , a mass of raps and vocal slaps . 

  No shame , no gain is the subliminal motto , and The Cherrys chase the drongo-rock dragon down to the wire . 

  The only problem I have with all this hectic activity is that the concept of funk-metal should have been buried under 20 feet of hyper dangerous asbestos padding before it was permitted to draw its first breath . 

  To their credit , The Cherrys are more to do with cartoon frenzies than the slick professionalism which seemingly warrants a Spin front cover at the drop of a bobble hat , but it's as hollow a victory as Linford Christie's Olympic Gold in the absence of Carl Lewis . 

  Easy come , easy go . 

  The Cherrys : the fruit of the loon . 

  THE WISHPLANTS 

  THE FIRST thing you notice about The Wishplants is how they make performing on stage look so good and so damn easy . 

  Most bands at this early stage would have trouble performing in front of their bedroom mirror . 

  Above the usual Fraggle style , the leaping around and smiling a lot stage presence , the Northampton four-piece have a frontman with a larger than life aura akin to Perry Farrell and Miles Hunt . 

  They're precisely the kinda group to resurrect your faith in new and exciting music , and this is only their tenth gig after just six months together . 

  By blending all the right components ( PWEI , MEF , Jane's Addiction , Megas ) and looking fashionably dreadlocked and cute , it's apparent why every A&amp;amp;R type in London is in the building tonight . 

  Nevertheless , the over-riding impression is that The Wishplants are not about to be manipulated . 

  Mainman Saul Denton rams his indie pendence up every snubbed nose in the venue . 

  To say they've captured the essence of pop is an understatement . 

  Funky guitars copulate with abrasive melodies on songs like " Lucky Me " , but it's not all based on jumped-up jollification . 

  There's the woeful " Move Around " and the surging " Misery " , adding dimension to their one way ticket to success . 

  The Wishplants have shoved themselves into a tight market gap and have found plenty of room to develop . 

  If practise breeds professionalism and The Wishplants are this adept now , in six months time they will have the gap all sewn up . 

  And we do not even have to wait " til then to see them . 

  ... 

  THESE PEOPLE TIE-DYED FOR YOU ! 

  12 HOURS OF PSYCHEDELIC MADNESS 

  IT'S A chemically inspired match of young versus old : 12 House Of Psychedelic Madness , running ( if that's the appropriate word ) from six in the evening to the crack of dawn , wherein the eager , blissed-out upstarts come face to face with crinkly creatures of rock mythology . 

  The two main " attractions " , Hawkwind and Planet Gong , have seemingly been around since the dawn of music in one form or another . 

  Hawkwind rely extensively on a canon of work virtually unchanged since their mid-'70s " Space Ritual " album . 

  Despite a series of lineup changes , they're still legends of the live circuit , monsters of epic rock work-outs and nightmarish electric psychedelia . 

  If this event is about affirming their status amongst the youthful pretenders to the acid crown , then Hawkwind and Planet Gong have loaded the dice in their favour by monopolising the prime-time slots . 

  This leaves their challengers with the uphill task of performing early to a half empty venue , or , in the case of SENSER , consigned to the early morning graveyard shift , by which time most of the audience has ( literally ) crashed out . 

  Still , WONKY ALICE bravely kick off with suitably weird and psychedelic poppy guitars , playing the ominous " Caterpillars " with the desperation of dying men to a barren Academy . 

  SPITFIRE -- last minute replacements for the ironically ailing Dr Phibes -- dig deep as well , living up to their name by frazzling the dreadheads with some painfully raw guitar trash . 

  In a scene straight out of This Is Spinal Tap , wigwams stand onstage draped in white gauze . 

  It's hard to work out what is going on as strobes explode and the shadowy , interchangeable members of HAWKWIND ( for it is they ) hide inside their ethereal pyramids . 

  The post-psychedelic light show ensures that the daytrippers are rooted to the floor as they sit through two and a quarter hours of swirling baby images , coloured cogs and kaleidoscope wheels . 

  Oh , not forgetting a stack of self-indulgent musical wanderings . 

  Inspiring pyrotechnics may trick the trippies , but it cannot hide the essentially old hat rock opera theatrics permeating every synth-splattered extravaganza . 

  It's like trying to turn beef steak rawk into a New Age lentilburger , not by changing the ingredients but simply enveloping it all in a laser-fried wholemeal bun and hoping that nobody will notice the difference . 

  " Masters Of The Universe " , " Brainstorm " and the " classic " " Silver Machine " are trundled out amidst the reworkings of other old excesses . 

  Hawkwind used to outrage the establishment by having a hippychick stripper onstage ; today they have a more wimmin-friendly dayglo dancer who could not outrage a paper bag , let alone dance his way out of one . 

  How apt . 

  Next up , and light years away from the real world , PLANET GONG have survived on an even more meagre diet of dodgy rock ideology and space cadet wizardry , commanded by the absurd Ronald McDonald persona of Daevid Allen -- long time centrifugal force in the Land Of Gong . 

  So implausible , so achingly out of touch are they , no amount of Toytown trickery can disguise their ancient irrelevance . 

  Is that a miniature Stonehenge hovering symbolically over the stage ? 

  Going , going ... 

  Gong . 

  Verily , the Academy is a raging inferno of inertia and glazed expressions . 

  Is it the effects of the drugs or terminal boredom ? 

  I cannot tell . 

  Certainly , Senser are the only thing working overtime come four o'clock in the bloody morning . 

  Except upstairs , that is : climbing past mountain ranges of slumped bodies , SONIC POLLUTION and the SPIRAL TRIBE sound system are spinning real hot and happening techno trip music . 

  This packed , pulsating sideshow proves that to get " far out " need not lead to deathly lethargy . 

  Downstairs in the entrance hall the temporary tattoo stand is busily adorning undercover bank clerks with rough-and-crusty-but-it'll-wash-off-by-Monday-morning suns . 

  Oddly enough , the sitars have completely sold out . 

  Oh yes it's Hades night ! 

  The , erm , legendary Daevid Allen gets'em smoochin' to the softly soulful sounds of Planet Gong . 

  Inset : They danced all night ( N-- ! ) 

  Hawkwind opt for the lone nutter theory ... 

  SWELL 

  CALM , CALM , calm . 

  It's dark enough onstage to hide myriad gloomy sins ; dark enough even to hide the receding hairlines and sweaty T-shirts of ageing college boy rock . 

  Somewhere in the shadows . 

  Swell -- all Lou Reed murmurs and blurred edges -- are surfacing out of the American new wave as Pavement's sneaky , awesomely controlled alter egos , the late night loiterers left behind after the circus is over . 

  When the grunge gets too much , at least 1992's relentless targeting of the American underground has flushed out a few dissonant rumbles . 

  It's dragged a few graceful oddities away from comparing navel fluff in their garages and shoved them on to the European circuit . 

  Like San Francisco's Swell -- two albums old on their own Psycho-Specific label , one album new on the Mean Fiddler's Mean label -- who shimmer with the kind of impossibly cool , nonchalant precision most tight-arsed British bands would die for . 

  Nothing particularly radical or upsetting is happening here . 

  It's just that Swell can generate real power , real languid grace , through stealth and self-absorption instead of strain or accident . 

  Sometimes -- on " Love " -- they're like the Pixies on a dump-truck full of downers . 

  All of the time they're introverted without ever alienating , able to craft an elegiac atmosphere that's pretty all-enveloping , subtly freaked rather than self-consciously freaked out . 

  A victory on the quiet , in other words . 

  STEREOLAB 

  YOU COULD say without fear of litigation or a severe kicking behind the pub that Stereolab's greatest strengths is their ability to rip off six other bands within five minutes and still end up with an identifiable sound which is rarely overshadowed by any of its mentors . 

  Suicide , Velvets , MBV , Cocteaus , Spacemen and even The Monkees spring to mind at some point during Stereolab's swimming excursions into your subconscious . 

  Not least during their horizontally laid-back , JJ Cale-esque blues bliss outs do they sound like Spiritualized , only you shall stay awake and may even feel like shaking your fringe/ rump/ boots ( delete according to drugs taken ) . 

  But they're at their best during songs like " Stomach Worm " , where a cute , simplistic beat pop tune ascends slowly into noisy chaos , thrashing around in an acid bath and trying to keep from being submerged . 

  It always fails , but that's half the fun . 

  Seaya's impenetrable , breathy French accent saves our blushes by rendering inaudible some of the worst sub-Nietzschian toss passing for lyrics you shall encounter this side of a Slayer LP , but she could sing a Happy Mondays lyric like commands from heaven . 

  Stereolab always look tonight as if they've got a few more tricks up their sleeve than anyone else around at the moment , and in an age where recycling the past to create a spurious version of the future is the order of the day , they may well prove to be a benchmark of quality for their times . 

  BREED 

  FOLLOWING THE theory that everyone -- at some point -- wants to be in a band ; Breed's possessed frontman is grabbing his opportunity by its ungainly bollocks . 

  There's a crowd of about 30 people but , as far as Mr Breed is concerned , he is playing Wembley Stadium . 

  Breed are the kind of band who will begin to write a tormented love song and watch it develop into a bloody massacre . 

  So it's not too ridiculous to compare them to a cross between Marc Almond , Nick Cave and The Chameleons . 

  Occasionally mainman Simon Breed will become so preoccupied with his crazed exhibition , he neglects the art of singing into the mic , grappling with his guitar as if it were a rabid pitbull while savagely screaming and throwing himself around the stage like an out-take from Nightmare On Elm Street . 

  The Liverpudlian trio have sold their souls to post-punk mayhem ( with an injection of screeching rockabilly ) and the operation is almost a success . 

  Songs like the shuddering " Hard Cash " and " Shaking The Bone " , their current single , are turbulent and torrid affairs of the heart . 

  Harsh and angry with undercurrents of lovelorn bitterness , but you cannot imagine them amounting to more than a mere outlet for crowd frustration . 

  CHICKS ARE HEAVY 

  L7 

  THE STRANGEST thing , tonight , is that L7 -- the new Runaways/ Girlschool/ Rock Follies , depending on where you stand -- wriggle out of the preconceptions surrounding their rock escapades and play like demons . 

  Like Queen Bees under attack , they sting . 

  To date , it's been reasonably simple to pick holes in their Heads-Down-Take-No-Nonsense-Mindless-Boogie , but here in New York they overcome both comparisons and critics , sending a tangible buzz round a capacity crowd , already reeling after each being given a free condom by a security man on the way in . 

  You get the feeling you've just walked into an alternative universe where L7 , free of the Women In Rock tag , reign supreme . 

  After a slot-it-out 18 months , which has seen them circuiting Europe and America like Nigel Mansell switched to turbo-boost , they turn up here -- excuse the expression -- absolutely knackered . 

  Yet , in heavy rock terms , they still retain an erudite edge and play with an urgency onstage that outstrips the uncharacteristically sluggish Babes In Toyland , when they played on the other side of town , two nights earlier . 

  They start like " Too Tough To Die " -era Ramones , with " Deadhead " and the tell-tale " Ein , zwei , drei , vier " countdown to " Slide " -- and then pummel through three or four numbers with a brightness and lethal-pop-edge that brings new life to their bludgeoned " Bricks Are Heavy " album ( particularly the lurching " Everglade " , which as a 45 was as devoid of pizzazz as Catchphrase is of wit and wisdom ) . 

  " Bricks " , their first LP for Slash with its surprise hit " Pretend We're Dead " , acts as a foundation stone for tonight's set , with older , dirtier material fitting nicely around it . 

  The Marquee crowd -- a muddle of college indie kids and rock fans in assorted Gunners chic -- react with an equal mix of abandon and pose , the kids at the front looking like they've got heads on springs as they crowd round the monitors . 

  AMIDST THE wild-ish scenes , L7 are delightfully down to earth . 

  After one outbreak of shoving and stage-diving they even say , with tongues steadfastly in their cheeks : " Be cool , the British press are here tonight " ( no doubt having spotted the slowly melting figure of Sirrs , trickling away into a corner ) . 

  There is a breath of punk in what they aspire to : the Do Anything You Wan na Do line of thought that infiltrates everything from their offstage character through to their dealings with the record company . 

  And at the same time there's an exasperated , frayed at the edges side to this performance . 

  Bassist Jennifer -- 12 hours' sleep in three days , we reckon -- adding : " I am having a really bad night tonight and I do not know what it is , but the next person who smacks the mic or stands on our gear ... 

  I am going to have to kill them . 

  It's not your fault , but unfortunately it will be your f--ing problem . " 

  This does not stop them lightening up later , as she sprawls offstage in a celebratory show of crowd-surfing . 

  Meanwhile , the structure that gave " Bricks Are Heavy " its tightly cemented sound builds into a sweat-sodden climax . 

  And takes on a surprising amount of colour : RED , naturally . 

  Brick red lights , red hair , red eyes . 

  The inflamed four-piece come over all fiery and explosive , fuelled by belligerent tracks like next single " Monster " and encore-opener " Shitlist " ( a universally appealing piece of spite ) . 

  They may lean towards simple solid-riffing more than the likes of the Babes or the dark Hole , but here , this alternative heavy steel sound has some ecstatic , if not inventive moments . 

  Both guitarists Suzi and Donita revel in the chugging momentum , epitomised by the guttural grind of " Wargasm " and " Mr Integrity " . 

  Compared to their last visit to the UK and the big Astoria show -- which was OK , but felt overlong -- this turns out to be a near-perfect delivery of their contrasting semi-dumb music and ultra-sharp attitude . 

  Even in the volcanic heat , they were dead cool . 

  Marquee cha-cha : Jennifer and Donita ( inset ) keep cool in the volcanic New York heat ... 

  ... 

  Then flip out . 

  Jennifer gets really carried away 

  STRANGELOVE 

  WITH MILLIONS of spotty young upstarts being so alarmingly eager to please at the moment , I guess that the slightly askew likes of Strangelove should be welcomed with open charms . 

  Eschewing the numbing Neds-by-numbers norm ( have half an idea , will tour ) , Strangelove are the miserable bleeders in the sunny side-up house of fun . 

  Given that neither The Blue Aeroplanes nor Levitation have exactly torched the charts with tunes of fire , the chances of a group formed by ex-pats from both of said bands formulating an instant pop nirvana appears about as likely as Spurs winning the Premier League . 

  Fittingly , Strangelove are to three-minute melodies what Gary Lineker is to goalkeeping . 

  They're a broody looking fivesome , all dark clothes and darker expressions . 

  The atmosphere is hardly lightened when guitarist Alex Lee takes a pissed stagediver to task , but one suspects that this is precisely the kind of turmoil Strangelove get their kicks from . 

  Unfortunately , the gloom remains resolutely unlifted by the music . 

  Non-specific janglings ? 

  Impenetrable ponderings ? 

  They've got the lot , dragged along by singer Patrick , a John Lydon sneer-a-like in an Oxfam suit . 

  It's all sturdy and dense and impressively intense , but it amounts to little more than a grumpy grumble from the arty side of town . 

  Strangelove are more " interesting " than invigorating , without ever really explaining the need for their nerve-wracked noise . 

  Which is a bit like building a hydrogen-powered engine and hiding the designs under your bed . 

  Strangelove ? 

  Very strange , love . 

  FADCHESTER BRAVES ON ! 

  NEW FAST AUTOMATIC DAFFODILS 

  REMEMBER WAH-wah pedals ? 

  Remember ill-focused jiggle-rock with pretend funk basslines and some git grunting over the top ? 

  Well , hey ! 

  There's none of it here tonight . 

  At the turn of the decade , however , there was a huge sulphurous swamp full of that sort of anaemic disco for people with beanbags for legs , and the New FADs nearly fell into it . 

  By rights they should now be quietly decomposing in Manchester , having tried out their experimental rhythm rock surrealism only to discover that self-analytical dance with guitars could not really compete with belching ego-Mancs who wanted to be adored or abhorred . 

  The New FADS missed the boat , but , well look here , they've built themselves a new one . 

  And this one is solid steel and beautifully streamlined . 

  The new New FADS ( how much newer could you get ? ) have re-upholstered their sound . 

  Shiny-eyed bassist Justin now manipulates Joy Division-funk basslines of a magnitude normally reserved for space-mission documentaries . 

  Guitarist Dolan is no longer afraid-to-rock , hammering Iron-girder metal riffs on to the FAD groove . 

  Neo-suedehead singer Andy appears to have gone through a second puberty , his former growling style of delivery having fallen down an octave well and climbed out deeper and darker . 

  It's all a lot less frail now . 

  A lot more imposing . 

  Where before , half the amusement of seeing the New FADS play was seeing whether the five unlikely groovers could carry off their groove thing without sounding like A Certain Ratio after one too many spliffs , now there is a confidence , and with it comes a hint of threat . 

  Dance it may be , but it's the surliest dance imaginable . 

  " This is what this song is all about/ This is what this song is all about " rants Andy in the voice of a grizzly bear with PMT . 

  Nobody has any idea what he's on about in the mangled trance opening song " Bong " , but at least there's some conviction and fire . 

  The new songs , which follow the brief rewind through absurdo oldster " Fishes Eyes " , are big , bold rough-house dance things which actually cohere rather than drift into percussive jam no-man's-land . 

  The single " It's Not What You Know " , a remarkable welding together of headband aesthetics and hypnotic syncopation , is a curmudgeonly diamond of a song . 

  " American Money " , " Kyphos " and " Patchwork Lives " are tunes of distinction too , super imposing , thanks to a phrase here and a lugubrious melodic twist there , a veil of real-life grime over the swaying dance beats . 

  This time round , as a packed , stomping and sweating Camden Palace demonstrates , the New FADS have got the balance right between body and mind . 

  As a smouldering , glowering , gritty dance-rock sound-system , they are a mini-triumph . 

  There is a backwash to all this , however : as a stage-show they are less than shadow-puppets on the wall . 

  Being only marginally better looking than The Farm does not excuse instant capitulation when it comes to performing , and tonight , apart from Andy's caged pussycat prowling , mostly lost in dry ice , they might as well have pulled the curtains . 

  When the New FADS get some go-go dancers , some Elton John glasses for Andy and a cod-piece for Dolan , they will be a glorious live event indeed . 

  Andy and Justin unveil the new New FADS 

  Andy prepares for his image make-over 

  EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES 

  LIFE AFTER A-LEVELS 

  If you have just gained the exam results you need for a place at university or college , or for a job , than congratulations ! 

  But if your exam results were not what you expected , or if you are not sure what to do next , here is some useful information and advice . 

  so you did not make the grade 

  For years everyone around you -- family , parents , even magazines and newspapers , have been telling you : " Work hard , Pass your exams , Your whole future depends on this " . 

  So you worked hard . 

  You passed GCSE , and perhaps other exams as well . 

  You went into the 6th form or to college and you worked hard . 

  You passed their exams . 

  You went on working hard . 

  Now there's a piece of paper saying your grades are not good enough . 

  It's not surprising if you feel like a failure . 

  But you are not alone and you are not a failure . 

  Not getting the exam results you expected is a lot more common than you might think . 

  Around 60 % of actual A-level results are different from those predicted -- the majority lower grades . 

  Of course , conditional offers from universities and colleges are generally made on predicted results . 

  That's why , every year , thousands of people have to change their plans . 

  This year , there has been another problem affecting some people who applied through UCCA or PCAS ; it seems there was a fault with the new UCCA equipment which is used to process all applications through the central systems . 

  An apparently large number of applications were either delayed or temporarily lost . 

  If your original application was rejected by some or all of the institutions you listed , this might have been because it was delayed and did not reach the admissions tutor until after the course was full . 

  If you think you are one of the applicants affected by this problem , it might be worth while contacting institutions again to ask if they would consider your application now . 

  On the other hand , there might be a different reason altogether why you did not get any offers , or why you did not get the exam grades you hoped for . 

  Perhaps you have been unwell or under stress . 

  Or maybe you did not work hard enough , or had chosen subjects you really did not enjoy , or you just were not up to it . 

  Be honest with yourself . 

  Get advice . 

  Then you can work out what to do next . 

  what to do next 

  The first thing to remember is that you have not necessarily lost your place even if you have not quite made the grades required . 

  It all depends on what the exam results are like nationally , how popular the course is , and whether the admissions tutor was particularly impressed by your application . 

  Ring up and ask , though it's best to wait a few days until tutors have worked out exactly what position their courses are in . 

  If you have lost your place , UCCA or PCAS will write and tell you so promptly . 

  You now have several options , so take a bit of time to think through what you really want to do -- and get the best advice you can . 

  You could re-sit one or more exams . 

  Or you could stay another year at school or college and re-take the subjects you failed . 

  Talk this over with your parents , teachers and careers officer . 

  How would you feel staying on at school when all your friends had left ? 

  How important is the particular course you chose ? 

  Might the university expect better grades than they asked for previously ? 

  Find out before you decide . 

  You could look for an alternative course at a different university or college . 

  This is probably what most people do and is usually successful . 

  But do not make decisions in a panic . 

  People who do sometimes find out they are very unhappy , either because the course is not what they expected , or because they just do not like the institution . 

  clearing 

  The Clearing System is designed to help people looking for an alternative place . 

  The idea is to match suitably qualified applicants with institutions which have vacancies . 

  Clearing starts on 26 August this year . 

  It is not until then that official information on course vacancies will be published . 

  But many universities and colleges are already advertising their courses in NME and the national press . 

  Most give telephone numbers you can ring for more information , and many will tell you over the phone if they are likely to offer you a place . 

  Do look at different courses from those you applied for originally . 

  You might well find something that is exactly right for you that you did not even know about earlier . 

  But if you are interested in a very popular subject , such as psychology or graphic design or law , do apply as soon as possible . 

  These are the course which will fill their vacancies rapidly . 

  From 26 August , the official UCCA and PCAS vacancy listings will be published in the Independent and Independent on Sunday newspapers . 

  They will also be available on several databases . 

  Your local Careers Office almost certainly has access to these and can help you . 

  These listings contain up-to-date details of all vacancies in all institutions in the UK . 

  results better than expected ? 

  Although it is less common than getting lower grades than predicted , some people get much better results and want to consider changing their plans accordingly . 

  If you are in this position , and want to change your plans for higher education , do get advice from the Careers Service . 

  There is a quite complicated procedure for people who have accepted offers from universities or colleges , but want to re-apply elsewhere after receiving their results . 

  what if you've been treated unfairly ? 

  If you are convinced that the grades you have been given are not correct , you can ask for a re-mark or for a re-assessment . 

  Both take time and cost money . 

  Your school or college are the best people to advise you . 

  getting help and advice 

  All the Careers Services will be running an On Course help and advice service from 21 August to the time when higher education courses actually start . 

  Specially trained careers advisers can help you think through your choices , give you impartial advice about your suitability for different opportunities , and help you find the right course . 

  They also have access to up-to-date information through a computer database . 

  What's more , this service is entirely free . 

  If you are not sure where to find your nearest Careers Office , look in the Phone Book under " Careers " . 

  Of course , your school or college know you and know what you are capable of , they are an excellent source of advice . 

  BBC and ITV both run excellent free helpline services staffed by trained careers advisers , and will be broadcasting special programmes to help A-level and BTEC students . 

  Whatever you decide to do next , good luck . 

  WRITE SAID FRED 

  EDITED BY THE INFO-MOUS FRED DELLAR 

  BR YOU EXPERIENCED ? 

  In the wake of your SHOCK HEADED PETERS piece , I think you should know that Karl Blake has not worked for British Rail for the past year and a half and is currently an art student in Sheffield . 

  Not only that , but he is still hugely involved in music and has a new Shock Headed Peters album coming out in September . 

  Titled " Several Headed Enemy " it's on his own label through World Serpent Distribution . 

  Additionally , he's been working with Left Hand Right Hand , who've just toured the States , while his other musical activities have seen him involved with British Racing Green and Danielle Dax , with whom he plays bass from time to time . 

  - It seems that Danielle Dax's " Pop Eyes " , once a contender in the NME indie charts , could also be up for re-release through WSD . 

  And could be that other Blake-Dax goodies are on the way -- though this one has not made it out of rumoursville at present . 

  HUGHES YOUR ILLUSION 

  A few months ago NME cover stars SEAN HUGHES and CATHAL COUGHLAN announced that they were bringing out an LP together . 

  Have you any details ? 

  Also , am I right in saying that the aforementioned album features none other than NME man Sherman ? 

  Oh -- and just one more thing . 

  Do you have any details about Sean Hughes doing any UK live dates , or , perhaps , another TV series ? 

  - Sherman emerged from his sonic Orbitarium but looked flustered when I mentioned the album , denying any participatory interest in the Hughes-Coughlan partnership . 

  " I only know that they are working together " he announced mysteriously before disappearing into the galaxy as the sound of an old Kraftwerk record filled the air . 

  The Kitchenware Records spokesperson , brought up on Newcastle Brown , was more down to earth . 

  " Sean and Cathal did record a demo , " he claimed , " but it was a bit of a mess and the latest news is that they might try again , maybe in September . " 

  As for Hughes' own career , everything seems to be on course for world domination . 

  Around January-February next year , there'll be a series nattily titled Up Yours With Sean Hughes , while further Sean's Shows are in the pipeline . 

  A tour has been pencilled in for November but , if you cannot wait , Sean's management would like to remind you that there's a video around called Sean Hughes -- Live And Seriously Funny . 

  Then they would , would not they ? 

  DIFFERENT KIND OF BLUE 

  The BLUE AEROPLANES discography was much appreciated . 

  But guess what ? 

  I have some information to add to it ! 

  I possess an album by The Art Objects titled " Bagpipe Music " , released on Heartbeat Records in 1981 . 

  The band line-up includes Gerard and Wojtek and is clearly the Aeroplanes in prototype form . 

  The album is remarkably well-packaged , complete with a gatefold lyric sheet which you can convert into a poetry pamphlet , while the music is diverse and includes a radical re-working of the " Batman " theme , some beat poetry and Aeroplanesque R&amp;amp;B . 

  It's incredible to think this is a debut album for it far outstrips the Aeroplanes' first " proper " album , which seems badly-produced and shabby in comparison . 

  - According to Nick , the track listing for the album is . 

  And , checking back , the Sounds review of the time ( in which journalist Rab claims that he's had a tape since November 1980 ) provided the release with a five star rating , while NME was mildly less enthusiastic , observing that " it's an odd LP , naturally flawed and imperfect and rather stilted in places but nonetheless a worthy attempt at indisciplinary entertainment . " 

  BYSSHE STREET KIDS 

  Could you find out what has become of SHELLEYAN ORPHAN ? 

  Do they still exist or are " Helleborine " and " Century Flower " to be the only albums to mark their existence ? 

  - The message is brief -- Shelleyan Orphan are alive and well and still signed to Rough Trade , who , in mid-October , will be releasing an album that answers to the name of " Humroot " . 

  Happy endings -- you cannot beat " em ! 

  LIFE IS SWEET 

  What's happened to RACHEL SWEET , once pride of Akron and a Stiff princess ? 

  - These days she's pretty much engaged in an acting career , although she did turn up in John Waters' Hairspray in 1988 to render Barbara Lynn Ozen's title song , which duly appeared on the soundtrack album . 

  More recently the US Rhino label released " Fool Around " , a retrospective that includes " Be Stiff " and her cover of Elvis Costello's " Stranger In The House " . 

  MANGE TWO 

  I read in the studio magazine that NEIL ARTHUR , once of Blancmange , was recording one more . 

  Have you any details ? 

  - Arthur , after six years in the wilderness , has signed to Chrysalis and recently began recording a series of tracks with producer Phil Bodger , all of which the label regards as potential singles . 

  Asked where he's been since he and Stephen Luscombe went their separate ways , the man who once lived on the ceiling claims : " Apart from trying to find the best dog in the world , I've worked on film scores , including one for an animated film , several pieces for Channel 4 documentaries as well as the incidental music for a Radio 4 play . 

  At first I thought I'd been commissioned to rewrite The Archers theme . 

  Alas not . " 

  News is that the first single , " One Day , One Time " , will emerge some time during September , while an album now seems a certainty for 1993 . 

  Sean Hughes and Cathal Coughton in mutual product placement scenario 

  Stiff's teen spirit , Rachel Sweet 

  DISCOGRAPHY 

  SONIC YOUTH 

  IT WAS getting embarrassing . 

  All those interviews , with every journalist involved asking Moore , Ranaldo , Gordon and Shelley about their reactions to Nirvana's success . 

  One mag even ran the headline Has Success Passed Sonic Youth By ? during recent weeks . 

  Thankfully , " Dirty " , the Sonics' recent Geffen album , entered the UK Top Ten during the first week of release and , even if it has a long way to go to equal the sales of " Nevermind " , things could be taking a turn for the better . 

  For NME's part we offer a celebratory discography , though the many US and Euro Sonic offerings have been omitted in order to keep the listing within the bounds of reason . 

  We love you , you big dummies 

  NME CHARTS 

  Tree people ! 

  Sebadoh rock the forest 

  Flak-in''ll , it's the Poppies ! 

  Reissue , repackage , recoup ! 

  Dr Alex : adventures beyond the VCR ahoy 

  The Partridges : on the game in 1972 

  FRED FACT 

  " MIA HAS a talent for mothering , the way some people have green fingers for gardening or an ear for music , " Woody Allen commented during recent child custody battle proceedings . 

  He certainly had a point , for Mia Farrow has raised 11 kids in all . 

  Little wonder , then , that the top of the US Hot 100 currently reflects a nationwide interest in babies . 

  For , at the time of writing , at Number Two is TLC's " Baby , Baby , Baby " , co-produced by Kenny " Babyface " Edmonds , the same producer sharing the credits of Boyz II Men's chart-topping " End Of The Road " . 

  Additionally , the same Top Ten houses Sir-Mix-A-Lot's " Baby Got Back " . 

  No Babes In Toyland perhaps , but all-in-all , more like a crche than a tally of hits . 

  Perhaps the whole trend really got underway in 1953 when both Teresa Brewer and ill-fated R&amp;amp;B singer Tommy Edwards logged separate hits with " Baby , Baby , Baby " , while the even more short-lived Frankie Lymon charted with " Baby , Baby " four years later , and yet another R&amp;amp;B star , one Billy Williams , notched a " Baby , Baby " hit during 1958 . 

  For a while it seemed that the whole black music scene had a fixation about penning songs with titles formed entirely around the same noun , Sam Cooke adding to his bank balance via " Baby , Baby , Baby " ( 1963 ) while James Brown band singer Anna King and Bobby Byrd provides a classic of the same title during'64 . 

  Since then there's been such winners as " B-A-B-Y " ( Carla Thomas , 1966 and Rachel Sweet , 1978 ) , " Baby , Baby " ( Eighth Wonder , 1988 ) and " Baby " ( Halo James , 1990 ) , the Mechanical Copyright people announcing a year ago that their database , at that point , contained 81 songs called " Baby , Baby " , 22 titled " Baby , Baby , Baby " and even one called " Baby , Baby , Baby , Baby , Baby , Baby , Baby " ! 

  The first hit record to ever mention a baby though ? 

  Well , there was certainly a best-seller titled " Baby Shoes " by The American Quartet , a vocal group , back in 1911 . 

  However , the earliest worthwhile baby-linked recording was arguably Bessie Smith's 1923 recording of Clarence Williams " " Baby Will not You Please Come Home " . 

  Not that Williams and Smith were the ideal partnership . 

  For the songwriter-pianist-producer led the blues queen to believe that she was signed to Columbia Records , when , in fact , she was actually signed to Williams and he was pocketing half of every recording fee . 

  The Baby parade has continued ever since , encompassing such ditties as " I Found A Million Dollar Baby In A Five And Ten Cent Store " , " You Better Keep Babying Baby ( Or Your Baby's Gon na Bye-Bye You ) " , and " Baby Let Your Drawers Hang Down " , the latter being performed at Babe Connors' Club in St Louis , where the girls did bumps and grinds on a mirror floor . 

  As for producer/ singer songwriter Babyface himself , he shares his professional name ( given him by Bootsy Collins ) with a song that was a US Top Ten hit for four different artists during 1926 . 

  In 1948 history repeated itself when the song was revived and proved a US Top 20 for four more acts . 

  Even then , that was not the end of things . 

  With the emergence of rock , Little Richard took the song and wop-bama-lammed it into the charts ( 1958 ) to be followed in turn by Bobby Darin ( 1962 ) . 

  And when disco became dominant , " Baby Face " became a favourite all over again , as New York's Wing And A Prayer Fife And Drums Corps turned the by-now dog-eared ditty into an international hit during 1976 . 

  Little wonder that Bobby Troup , of " Route 66 " fame , was once moved to pen " Baby , Baby , All The Time " ! 

  Young Patsy " Eighth Wonder " Kensit displays the style and poise that has made her a Hollywood superstar . 

  Sort of . 

  GREAT POP THINGS -- THE PHIL COLLINS STORY ( Prelude to All Hate Special ) : " HE TRIED TO CHANGE THE WORLD WITH HIS ALL ROUND VERSATILITY " 

  Why it if a boy and an ordinary fort of boy indeed . 

  What if your name ? 

  Hi h'am called Phil Collinf , fir 

  and have you any experience at the finging Phil ? 

  Hi cannot dance , Hi cannot fing and Hi am fcooled as a thefbian 

  Would you like a fupporting role in my tribal love-rock mufical Camelot ? 

  DISREPUTABLE GENT 

  Phil's first big break in showbiz was when , as a child actor , he took on the challenging role of Arthur Dodger in Charles Dickens' classical-rock musical " Camelot " where he learned all he knows re : homelessness ... 

  EEE CHUCKY EGG BE A FERRET AND DRAG A KEG OF MILD OOPPT FROM T'GLORY'OLE 

  GOR BLIMEY TWEACLE OW'S YER OLD APPLES ? 

  WRONG ! 

  After being in " Camelot " for quite a bit , and doing various other things like appearing in TV soap commercials , Phillip got his 2nd Big Break in showbiz . 

  He landed a plum roll in " Coronation Street " 

  LUMMY 

  Wanted : Drummer for Theatrical Rock band hoping to increase street cred . 

  Must be normal bloke and preferably have run with some type of working class street gang and not have a domineering mum or anything 

  Phil's 3rd Big Break in showbiz came when he saw an ad in the back of a public school music paper . 

  He high-tailed it on down to meet Genesis , whose drummer had been taken away by his mum ... 

  Tara ! ! 

  See ya ! 

  Bye ! ! 

  Continued next week with reader participation " abuse bubbles " so you can put thing in that we are not allowed to ... 

  Phil's 4th break in showbiz came when Pete Gabriel left the band and went off to the rainforest disguised as a flower . 

  Being a talented actor , Phil could do his voice and took over on singing ... 

  ANGST 

  EDITED BY IAN McCANN 

  SURPRISE , SURPRISE ! 

  THIS WEEK , A VERITABLE MOZ SPESH ! 

  angst caption omitted as repeated elsewhere 

  An open letter to the NME and Morrissey from Johnny Rogan 

  THE MOMENT Morrissey unfurled that Union Jack I knew he was in trouble , I assumed that the " Is Morrissey A Racist ? " debate was a discredited old chestnut , but now it's back , bigger than ever . 

  The allegation is dangerous and insulting to Morrissey , especially when you consider that he has never publicly espoused racist views . 

  In the aftermath of the unfortunate furore over " Panic " , the Smiths played an Anti-Apartheid gig , a fact which deserved a passing mention in your round-up . 

  However , the NME is right to stress the alarming cumulative effects of Morrissey's flirtation with right-wing imagery . 

  It is extremely disconcerting , and the Madness debate provided a salutary lesson for Morrissey , as well as ourselves . 

  What the NME's five-page article really underlines is the contradictory and capricious nature of Morrissey himself . 

  Yes , he was fascinated by Suedehead and its lurid tale of violence against blacks and homosexuals , but do not forget that as a kid he had a strong affection for gore and horror in general . 

  He clearly enjoyed the vicarious thrill of reading about grisly murders and thoroughly enjoyed The Murderers' Who's Who . 

  One might have expected a sadistic Nightmare On Elm Street lyric to emerge from such interests , but instead he wrote the wonderfully moving " Suffer Little Children " and later made a point of condemning Myra Hindley . 

  Such surprise twists and seeming contradictions are typical of the man . 

  By contrast , his most romantic song ( " There Is A Light That Never Goes Out " ) eulogised violent death as the perfect goal . 

  His work , image and public pronouncements still veer wildly from pacifism to violence , from obsessive love to profound hatred , from commendable sensitivity to unrestrained cruelty . 

  He wants me dead , of course , but there have been other targets in the past , like Thatcher and high-street butchers . 

  Conversely , he retains a gallery of obsolete idols , whom I am sure he will love for ever . 

  The fan and the fanatic are almost interchangeable . 

  It's hardly surprising then , that we get confused by the signals he gives out -- now more than ever . 

  My gut reaction is that Morrissey is NOT a racist . 

  Despite the catalogue of comments , there is precious little in his past or present to support such a contention . 

  He moved quickly from the pulp of Suedehead to more healthy tomes such as Sex And Racism and Diary Of A Harlem Schoolteacher . 

  Enlightened stuff -- and fully supported by Morrissey . 

  I've seen evidence of his denouncing racial prejudice in others , and it greatly impressed me . 

  We would all do well to remember that , and not transform a debate about right-wing imagery into a witch hunt . 

  That said I've also been taken aback by Morrissey's oddly derogatory remarks about Pakistanis as an 18-year-old and , without dwelling on them , I must say I found such flippant adolescent observations infuriatingly inconsistent with his general world view . 

  Even now , it seems a strange contradiction , but not a sinister one . 

  But that was all a long time ago , was not it ? 

  Perhaps , in retrospect , I was over-kind in interpreting the offensive " Bengali In Platforms " as a belated working through of petty teenage bigotry . 

  A harsher critic would have gone for the jugular and claimed that this was a blunt reiteration of those dormant adolescent prejudices . 

  I still give Morrissey the benefit of the doubt on this , even through his backward looking " patriotism " makes me stop and rethink . 

  The NME stresses Morrissey's comments about the vileness of reggae and black music in general . 

  It would have been prudent to add his long-standing love of Tamla Motown to qualify that viewpoint . 

  He certainly does not hate all black music . 

  In any case , the correlation between musical tastes and racial prejudice is a complex argument -- the ska-loving skinhead brigade prove that . 

  I find Morrissey's latest " racially inspired " songs to be uncontroversial compared to " Bengali In Platforms " . 

  " The National Front Disco " is such a self-evidently silly title and the sentiments and tone so obviously satirical that you'd have to be pretty blinkered to be offended by it . 

  " England for the English " ? 

  If Morrissey cannot be allowed to write in the third person using a character , without people automatically assuming the views expressed are his own , then we've got problems too . 

  It's the other trappings that I find irksome -- particularly the Union Jack . 

  Perhaps he regards the flag as a suitable prop to emphasise the sentiments of " Glamorous Glue " , but he well knows its other connotations . 

  Morrissey's irony loses its appeal when he messes with such a powerful symbol . 

  I am sure Morrissey is arrogant enough to believe that he can reclaim the Union Jack and even the entire skinhead movement for his own " little England " fantasies and subtly satiric purposes . 

  If so , this is a sad delusion . 

  Last year , Morrissey told the NME : " I am incapable of racism " which , in turn , prompted me to exonerate him from any underlying racist intent in his work and to conclude , " the liberal cycle appears to have been completed " . 

  Perhaps we both spoke too soon . 

  I hope not . 

  If Morrissey is making comments based upon a private mythology , then he ought to realise that a hell of a lot is lost in translation . 

  The fabled golden age of England that he apparently yearns for is merely his lost youth in disguise . 

  Like Michael Jackson , he seems intent on recreating something he never had . 

  In his songs he appears to realise that the dear old Blighty that he glorified has been reduced to a sorry Union Jack T-shirt on a frustrated football supporter . 

  His attitude to England seems terribly confused , as one might expect from a person who despises royalty but brandishes the cross of St George . 

  Morrissey's " Englishness " is somewhat ironic when you consider that his parents and his entire extended family only arrived here during the'50s . 

  As the son of new immigrants , he has experienced his own share of cultural adjustment , a point that's easily forgotten . 

  And what are we to make of his comments while in Dublin : " It's good to be back home " . 

  I trust that if he tours Eire or Northern Ireland during the summer he will not be insensitive enough to parade the Union Jack there . 

  Morrissey deserves to be quizzed relentlessly on his attitude towards the Asian community , Asian culture , the NF , Britain's generation and the myth of " Englishness " . 

  It would be useful to learn how he reconciles his vision on these matters with his work as a songwriter and performer . 

  Having said that , I think we should be wary of falling into the trap of dictating to Morrissey what he should write about , or in what tone . 

  I , for one , would still prefer the mocking irony of " The National Front Disco " and " We will Let You Know " to the finger-pointing sloganeering of a " Margaret On A Guillotine " or " Meat Is Murder " . 

  That's just personal taste . 

  I realise Morrissey's ambiguity on such subjects as race and sexuality will frustrate those who feel that a firm stance is necessary in the current political climate . 

  Morrissey , of course , prefers arch playfulness and that is his prerogative as a person and a songwriter . 

  Those who play with fire , however archly , must expect to get their fingers burnt once in a while , and when ironic lyrics are allied to questionable public utterances and clearly provocative imagery , then it is reasonable to question the man's motives and intentions . 

  So , Morrissey -- where does fashion end and fascism begin ? 

  Do tell ? 

  Johnny Rogan , author of Morrissey &amp;amp; Marr : The Severed Alliance 

  HEAVEN KNOWS ETC 

  Yesterday ( August 9 ) was supposed to be one of the greatest nights of my life . 

  I was supposed to see Morrissey again . 

  I had waited 385 days to see him , the one I love . 

  I was so excited , I was actually going to see him , he was going to be there and so was I. 

  I suspect that people are laughing by now , but I do not care . 

  Morrissey means everything to me and I am not bothered by people who laugh at me , I really do not care , I love Morrissey , end of story . 

  I knew before I went that I would cry that day , but I thought it would be because he was standing in front of me , not because he was not standing in front of me . 

  When I arrived and was told he was not appearing I was so devastated . 

  It felt as if my whole world had come crashing down on me . 

  I could not believe it , I just cried and cried . 

  People laughed at me but I do not care . 

  I was not going to see Morrissey and at that point the whole of Finsbury Park could have been laughing and it would not have mattered . 

  I assume a lot of people will laugh at Morrissey for this and the Glastonbury thing will be dragged up again . 

  I do not care , Morrissey is still wonderful and I still love him as much , if not more than I used to . 

  When I was told why he could not play I just cried even more . 

  How could anyone be so cruel ? 

  I never imagined Morrissey fans as being cold and brutal people . 

  How could they do it to him ? 

  How could anyone " boo " a person as wonderful as he ? 

  I imagine all these Madness fans have never felt an emotion in their life . 

  Do they not understand how much people like myself love Morrissey ? 

  Whoever threw that orange and that 50p deserve to die in the same M3 pile-up as Johnny Rogan : they would not be missed . 

  I love Morrissey , but who could ever love them ? 

  I do not know if I will ever forgive Madness' fans : they took away my beloved Morrissey . 

  I cannot think of a worse crime . 

  I can . 

  Concentration camps in Serbia . 

  Starving millions in Africa . 

  War in Northern Ireland . 

  Babies being stolen . 

  Innocent people spending 15 years in prison . 

  An Indian woman being torched at a bus-stop . 

  Is that enough for the time being ? -- IM 

  THE MOZ PIT 

  It's only a thought , but is it possible that the person who threw the carton of orange juice and 50p piece at Morrissey at the Madness ( Madness , not Morrissey ) gig was not some National Front yob but someone who felt that draping oneself in a Union Jack -- still , like it or not , a symbol of racism -- is itself racist ? 

  Morrissey should not be so arrogant as to think that he can , expecting no recrimination or criticism , use racist imagery without anything but the most ambiguous of reasons . 

  " The last truly British people you will ever know , " -- some hope , or some despair ? 

  No-one knows any longer when Morrissey is being sarcastic and when he is trying to awaken us to something . 

  Possibly , as someone new to The Smiths and their legacy , I simply am not used to Moz's sense of humour but , really , that joke's not funny anymore . 

  Let us examine why Morrissey might have cuddled the Union flag . 

  One , he might have wanted to show his national pride . 

  Possible , but if I was a BNP yob I'd think he was taking the piss and would throw something , and if I was not , I might throw something anyway because nationalism stinks -- keep those " Ethnic Cleansing " concentration camps in your mind . 

  Two , he might have been reclaiming the flag for non-racists . 

  Great , but cue missiles . 

  Three , he might have been taking the piss , provoking the crowd . 

  Here come those coins . 

  Maybe he just likes the pattern on the flag . 

  I du n no . 

  But do not kid yourself . 

  Morrissey is no idiot . 

  He must have suspected that a Madness gig would attract a football crowd . 

  Even is he was not , he must have been aware that there were some yobs there . 

  To go onstage in the flag is to be a 50p magnet , no matter what it might mean in an ideal world . 

  Do not go feeling sorry for him : he has more power than you shall ever have . 

  He probably relishes this controversy . 

  You will have your own battle to fight : let Morrissey fight his . 

  He's hardly a bloody martyr for being hit by a carton of juice , is he ? 

  He's a pop singer , not Jesus -- IM 

  LAST NIGHT I DREAMT SOMEBODY LOVED ME 

  In the second week of June 1974 this page ( who are you , Marvo the Memory Woman ? -- IM ) hosted the opinions of a passionate young lad from the North . 

  Ardent and sound . 

  The author of this commentary ? 

  Our very own Steven Morrissey . 

  Doubtless enamoured as he was to see his name in print , I hope that now , by use of the same medium , he will understand my thoughts which I sent with equally heartfelt intensity : so where the f-- was Morrissey at Finsbury Park on Sunday ? 

  Like thousands of other fans I was truly disappointed at his unannounced withdrawal from the Madness gig . 

  Although I managed to flog my tickets to a couple of touts , this month's expenditure still leaves 40 quid unaccounted for . 

  If Morrissey mocks the hand that feeds him , let he himself be mocked by the words that serenade him : " This is the last song that I shall ever sing -- well I've changed my mind again . 

  Goodnight and thankyou " -- " Truly Disappointed " , Morrissey . 

  LAST OF THE FAMOUS INTER-CITY PLAYBOYS 

  Mozza : you're the one for me , gitty . 

  When will you realise that your fans are the ones who keep your career alive ? 

  We're not going to stop buying your records ( always , always the cop-out -- IM ) but we're not going to put up with your childish behaviour forever . 

  To pull out of the Sunday Madness gig when you did was lower than low . 

  " Everyday Is Like Sunday " -- I just hope they're not all as crap as this one turned out to be . 

  I just wasted a whole day to see someone who could not be bothered to turn up . 

  SWAYED HEAD : THE BOY WITH THE COIN IN HIS SIDE 

  Gosh , I was so surprised to see skinheads at a Madness gig . 

  That bunch of skins in the moshpit sure showed their true colours with Nazi rallying cries of " Morrissey's a wanker " and their brown-shirt favourite " OO the f--in''ell are you ? " 

  But their best move of the day was throwing that Union Jack over his shoulders . 

  Bet the poor lad did not even know it was there . 

  BONEHEAD DRAG 

  I wish to congratulate all those people who hurled bottles of piss ( It's getting wilder with every letter . 

  I must say I never go out without my handy bottle of piss -- IM ) at Morrissey -- the useless shit deserves it . 

  He certainly shot himself in the foot , pulling out of Glastonbury and playing Finsbury Park . 

  I believe at Glastonbury he would have blended well with the bill : at Finsbury Park he stood out like a sore thumb . 

  People around me stated " Oh hell , it's that poncy twat from The Smiths that loves flowers . " 

  This response was to be expected . 

  Morrissey stood out from the bill in that he's not yobbish . 

  But otherwise , he fitted perfectly : this was a day of eccentric pop , the last of England . 

  He was a fool to expect anything other than he got , however : surely only vanity could have made him think he could seduce a mob of Madness fans ? 

  And he's certainly big enough to draw his own crowd , just as large as Madness . 

  How about a free concert , Morrissey ? 

  Whatever the reasons for your action , you know it would earn goodwill -- IM 

  SHEILAS TAKE A BOW 

  Due to the pre-UK release -- ha ha -- of " Your Arsenal " , much is forgiven concerning that dreaded disappearance from Australia last year ( He does not just do it here then -- IM ) , but a snappy return trip would not go astray in the hearts of the young distraught fans , please please please ... 

  I know it's gon na happen someday . 

  We are waiting and trying not to lose faith , but you see we're suffocating ... oh my shiftless body . 

  Last week's controversial NME cover 

  PUBLIC NME 

  Hey kids ! 

  You want filth about big names , huh ? 

  How about STAVROPOPALOPULADIS , a Greek man who never washes ? 

  Failing that , what about MADONNA , ever so slightly lapsed Catholic of pop's parish ? 

  The Mad one turned up at a recent New York gig of fabulous , trendy , baggy-type band with organ , THE CHARLATANS ( UK ) . 

  She got backstage too , climbing over CHER , FRANK SINATRA , LIZ TAYLOR and the other top stars queueing to kiss the hand of the majestic TIM BURGESS . 

  Unfortunately THE CHARWALLAS ( UK ) were either too drunk or too gobsmacked to say anything to the pointy-chested one , only managing a mumbled " Hi " . 

  Unfortunately , Madonna took this to be an indication of the lads' state , and took her leave . 

  Would you let your daughter sleep with these lads , namely SUEDE ? 

  Yes , probably . 

  Perhaps Madonna should have a chat about the pop ethics with these young hopefuls . 

  At the photo shoot for Suede's forthcoming NME feature , photographer KEVIN CUMMINS was snapping the band through a cardboard crucifix-shape . 

  First to the lens was BRETT ANDERSON , and with his unfeasibly long arms he took to the shape perfectly . 

  However , BERNARD , the guitarist , refused to do the shot . 

  Why ? 

  Because he did not want to offend his mum and dad , devout Catholics . 

  So much for rock rebellion , eh ? 

  Now here's what we here at Public NME call smart . 

  Shy , retiring MINISTRY frontman AL JOURGENSEN , currently terrifying America as part of that annual disaster called Lollapalooza , has taken to walking into nightclubs with a megaphone , and yelling " I am Satan , take this f--ing dance music off . " 

  What's more , he's got a Bones Tec , a roadie devoted solely to the placement and safe keeping of the animal bones hanging off the Jourgensen-stand . 

  Unfortunately , Mr Bones takes his work home with him , and he's been making members of the LUSH sick by bringing the skulls of baby birds to dinner . 

  However , Lush have recently hardened-up , and MIKI and CHRIS have partaken in the Lollapalooza Bile Ritual , in which a member of the crew feeds ( those of a nervous disposition skip this bit -- Green-faced Ed ) a seven-foot-long plastic tube into his gut via a nostril , into which a quart of lager , a squirt of tomato ketchup and a portion of chocolate sauce are pumped . 

  The whole lot is then regurgitated and given to mugs to drink . 

  Miki &amp;amp; Chris eagerly gulped the resulting mess down , but it was all too much for WILLIAM REID of the MARY CHAIN , who bottled out altogether . 

  No-one has yet managed to get ICE CUBE to sup on the drink , but hopefully Paraquat can be added to the mixture . 

  Too late department : leading wearers of dust-masks ALTERN 8 took the stage at Stafford's Bingley Hall last weekend with a special guest star , an African witch-doctor flown in specially for the occasion . 

  Amid much ritual and farting about , the doc and the daft ravers pronounced rock dead . 

  Next week , in recognition of this magnificent feat , Public NME will be devoting the entire page to care of your dust mask . 

  Leading European and member of the committee for Anglo-Bengali relations , MORRISSEY shocked the publishing world recently . 

  Following his massive success with Johnny Rogan -- The Severed Head , Morrissey intends to write his own tome comprising a load of pictures and the great one's own captions . 

  " Great idea " said Britain's publishers , unfurling their collection of fine antique banknotes . 

  Unfortunately , they rolled them up again quick when they found out that Moz was after 40 grand for the privilege . 

  Rumours that the great man has employed MARK THATCHER as his literary agent remain unconfirmed ... 

  Hang on . 

  Who are these smart types in suits from Next and nice shiny shoes from Freeman Hardy Willis ? 

  And why do they look entirely unfamiliar with the musical instruments they lovingly pluck at every night ? 

  Surely it could not be BALLOON , Dedicated's answer to The Two Ronnies ? 

  Yes it could . 

  The hapless pair parked their hired van outside the LA offices of BMG , their US distributors , went upstairs for two minutes , came back down and found their gear , money , their original'60s clothing and instruments had been nicked . 

  Since they're only at the start of their two-month US tour , BMG sent them down to Next for some smart fashions . 

  On a similar subject , THAT PETROL EMOTION were held up in Derry ( the place , not the EMF sex-god ) last week . 

  Three youths armed with Armalite pen-knives waited for the band to unload their gear before threatening them and attempting to drive away with their van . 

  Fortunately for the Petrols , the van would not start and the kids ran off , embarrassed . 

  Unfortunately for the Petrols , they were still stuck with the van and the gear ... 

  More armed and extremely dangerous Irishmen in true tabloid style : THE FRAMES , Island Records' folk knees-up answer to ANDREW STRONG , were arrested at Dublin Airport last week for being in possession of high-velocity water guns . 

  Impounded by airline staff , the squirters were returned to the band when they arrived in London . 

  Shame they did not just lock the band up and throw away the key ... 

  A big Public NME -type congratulations to BEN of the SENSELESS THINGS who found an equally senseless thing to marry him on August 14 . 

  Women around the world were heard to heave a huge sigh of relief . 

  The blushing ( with reason ) bride that drew the short straw was one Jo ; formerly of a record store in Chicago , who sold Ben a rare MBV bootleg , causing him to drop immediately to one knee . 

  Stars in attendance included several members of SWERVEDRIVER and the remainder of the Senseless Thingys , ie no stars at all ... 

  Another unlucky woman is Debbie Gillard , who got married last Saturday to RUSS HUNT , top crew geezer for the STUFFIES and brother of MILO O'HUNT . 

  In dutiful alcoholic attendance for Russ' stag night at the Camden Palace were the entire memberships of EMP , the Stuffies , PWEI and the FABULOUS . 

  The pop star's revenge , FEARGAL SHARKEY , formerly wobbly-voiced member of THE UNDERTONES who sought the kicks of teenagers , and wobbly-voiced failed solo star who advised listening to dad ( wonder why his career went down the toilet ) , has swapped allegiances and is now A&amp;amp;R man at Polydor . 

  God knows , he could not be any worse at that than he was at his last job ... 

  TRENT REZNOR , guv'nor of almost top electronic grungers NINE INCH NAILS , has moved into the house in LA where SHARON TATE , leading dead actress , was murdered by CHARLES MANSON . 

  Reznor was not aware of it , however , and was somewhat surprised to find nasty things going bump in the night . 

  Unlike everybody else , however , the hard man did not look up the neighbourhood exorcist in Thompson's Local Directory . 

  Instead he called his band and the whole lot are now cutting their next album round there with help from the ghost of La Tate . 

  If Nine Inch Nails' dreadful racket does not scare her off , nothing will . 

  At Smashed ! last week , new sensitive rock types MOOSE and KINGMAKER were among the revellers . 

  LOZ was revelling more than most , and after the club closed he dragged sexy woolly hat-wearing NME hack SIMON WILLIAMS around the streets of Islington looking for a pot-bellied old man clutching a bottle of champagne as it was " the only way we will get a drink at this time in the morning " . 

  Unfortunately , the only pot-bellied old man they ran into was clutching a plastic container of meths , and our heroes could not quite sink to such a Lollapalooza level of debauchery ... 

  BLEACH FOR THE GUYS 

  YEAH , NIRVANA , I always liked them . 

  I knew all about them when they were called the Savage Sausages and they used to play the Powerhaus singing " Louie Louie " through a 20 watt PA ... 

  Now's your chance to impress your friends when they come over to your cardboard box . 

  Play them the Nirvana album they've never heard . 

  Yes , thanks to your incredibly generous friends at Public NME and our willingness to sleep with anyone for the sake of our readers , we've got 20 copies of " Bleach " , the classic debut set from Nirvana , to give away . 

  All you've got to do is answer one incredibly simple Nirvana-related question : 

  Rod Hull is famous for appearing with which feathered creature from Australia ? 

  Send the answer on a postcard to : Do not forget to include your name and address , and state whether you'd prefer vinyl/ cassette/ CD , you picky gits . 

  Nirvana when they were Savage Sausages BC 

  BAT TRICK ! 

  It could all have been so different , so glorious . 

  Whatever happened to LESLIE CARTER , selected alongside Clive Allen on the subs' bench at an England Schoolboys International against Wales at Wembley on March 20 , 1976 ? 

  According to the programme , ( see left ) Leslie was " A regular member of the Blackheath District XI " , and " after taking his O levels he hopes to become a professional footballer " . 

  Les never made it , but he's no stranger to the wearing of shorts : the sub is better known as the FRUITBAT , third from the left in the front row of the pic . 

  Doubtless Fruitbat's future choice of career was influenced by the " Singalong with Ed " Stewpot " Stewart " that opened the afternoon's entertainment . 

  Among the songs on offer were " Remember You're A Womble " , " Y Viva Espana " , " John Brown's Body " and " Sheriff Fatman " . 

  CARTER , Leslie Crown Woods School . 

  Regular member of the Blackheath District S. F. A . 

  XI and has also represented Inner London County S. F. A . 

  and London S. F. A . 

  An Associated Schoolboy with Crystal Palace F. C. , he is actively interested in Athletics and after taking his " O " levels he hopes to become a professional footballer . 

  International Law of War and Peace 

  Nuclear Weapons , State Power and Legitimacy in International Law 

  SOL PICCIOTTO 

  I hope in discussing this question to try to examine , as frankly and fairly as possible , the relationship between legality on the one hand , and political organisation and political struggle on the other , in relation to this most vital of all issues for the survival of the human race , the control and elimination of nuclear weapons . 

  In international relations , as well as in social relations more generally , law provides a framework for regulating and legitimising relations of power . 

  Law is therefore rooted in economic and political power relations and processes of domination . 

  However , this does not mean that law is the same as economic or political relations , nor that it is a mere covering , a set of clothes or a veil , concealing economic and political reality . 

  It does mean that law is not a fixed , precise and immutable set of rules ; and that not only its content but also its form are subject to interpretation , adaptation and change as part of and in response to social change . 

  It is especially important to remember this in relation to international law , which is based on what states have formally agreed to , or accepted as binding practice . 

  This can lead to an excessively narrow view of international law , unless we remember that states are in reality agglomerations of people . 

  They are dominated , it is true , by their elites and ruling classes , whose representatives are the ones who sign the treaties and send the diplomatic notes . 

  But those leaders are necessarily responsive , to a greater or lesser extent , to the political pressures from those they attempt to rule , as well as to historical necessity -- in broad terms , the needs of survival and development of human society . 

  It is equally important to stress also that law is not whatever you please , nor what you would like it to be . 

  In fact , it is particularly important for any popular movement to avoid the all-too-tempting trap of merely asserting that the law is what we would like it to be . 

  After all , as I have said , it is our rulers who dominate the processes of formulation and enforcement of the law . 

  While they generally take care to express such formulations in the language of reason , justice and humanitarian concern that will command consent , they also take care that very little creeps into those formulations that will seriously impede their exercise of power . 

  Rather than merely assert that what we desire is already reality , therefore , I would argue that our job is to discuss the contradictions and possibilities in the law as it has developed historically , as part of and in response to political and economic struggles . 

  In this way the lawyer has a part to play within political movements , such as the peace movement , while acknowledging that it is not law alone that can bring about the changes we desire , but it is that movement as a whole that can and must do so . 

  THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE LAWS OF WAR 

  The laws of war emerged in their modern form from the last part of the nineteenth century . 

  This period saw the beginning of attempts by conferences of representatives of states to draw up treaties or conventions on different aspects of the law of armed conflict , what is referred to as the jus in bello , that is , the rules of how war should be waged if it should break out . 

  This period began in 1856 with the Declaration on Privateering adopted at the Congress of Paris at the conclusion of the Crimean War . 

  A major part was played by the international Red Cross movement , founded in 1863 , and whose role was formalised in the Geneva Conventions of 1864 and 1906-7 on the treatment of the wounded and the sick , and which also played a major role in the movement to impose humanitarian principles to the conduct of war . 

  The period culminated in the two great Peace Conferences of 1899 and 1907 at The Hague , which led to the conclusion of thirteen Conventions and four Declarations , covering land and maritime warfare generally , as well as many particular aspects , such as the specific conventions covering the laying of mines , the carrying out of naval bombardments and so on . 

  It is very important to emphasise that in drawing up these formal treaties covering the limitation and control of the methods and means of warfare , those involved did not see themselves as creating new rules , but as codifying existing principles and specifying how they were to apply to the rapidly changing conditions of warfare produced by political and technological developments . 

  The nature of these conventions as a codification of existing general principles of customary international law is clearly seen in the general Hague Conventions on the Laws and Customs of War on Land , the Convention II of 1899 , revised in Convention IV of 1907 . 

  It was made explicit by the inclusion in those Conventions of the famous provision in the Preamble which has been known as the Martens clause . 

  This states : 

  Thus the development of the laws of war has consisted of an effort to maintain and affirm certain basic principles , while developing and refining their specific application to the changes in methods of warfare and the continual and horrific increase in humanity's capacity to destroy itself . 

  The codification effort that culminated in the Hague conventions was an attempt to control the increased scale of warfare brought about by the transition from relatively small professional armies to large conscript ones , and the growth in the destructive power of weapons consequent on the growth of large-scale modern industry . 

  Hence there were general codes regulating the conduct of hostilities ( covering matters such as the taking and treatment of prisoners of war , the use of spies , sieges and bombardments , flags of truce and armistices , pillage , regimes of occupation and so on ) , as well as conventions on the limitation and outlawing of specific weapons , notably expanding bullets and asphyxiating gases . 

  The fact that the Conventions on the laws of war rest upon underlying general principles which must be flexibly interpreted and developed to meet new situations was demonstrated in the trials of the major war criminals after the Second World War . 

  The Charters agreed by the Allied Powers which set up the International Military Tribunals at Nuremberg and Tokyo and the judgments of those Tribunals made it clear that everyone , from the lowest private soldier to the highest general and statesman is required to comply with the humanitarian spirit and the generally accepted principles of the laws of war . 

  In fact , the 1907 Hague Conventions were not formally applicable to that conflict , because several of the belligerents were not party to them , and under the so-called " general participation clause " the Hague Conventions could not therefore apply even between those who were parties . 

  Nevertheless , the rules of the Conventions were treated as formulations of the generally accepted principles of the law of war , and binding as such ( Roberts and Guelff , 1982 , p. 156 ) . 

  The revulsion caused by the full awareness of the extent of fascist war crimes led to the conclusion under the auspices of the United Nations of the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide . 

  However , any further attempts at a more comprehensive codification to bring up to date the humanitarian controls of war were frozen with the onset of the Cold War . 

  Only the Red Cross had sufficient prestige to conclude a new set of four Geneva Conventions on the Treatment of Sick and Wounded and Prisoners and the Protection of the Civilian Population , in 1949 . 

  It took almost twenty years to launch a new attempt to embody in formal texts some of humanity's yearnings for effective restrictions on war . 

  Renewed ferocious outbreaks of war , especially in Vietnam and the Middle East gave rise to fresh concern which was especially articulated by the newly-independent states of Africa and Asia . 

  A resolution of the 20th international conference of the Red Cross at Vienna in 1965 affirmed the minimum principles to which states must conform : 

  that the right of the parties to a conflict to adopt means of injuring the enemy is not unlimited ; 

  that it is prohibited to launch attacks against the civilian population as such ; 

  that distinction must be made at all times between persons taking part in the hostilities and members of the civilian population to the effect that the latter be spared as much as possible ; 

  that the general principles of the Law of War apply to nuclear and similar weapons . 

  This resolution was taken up through the United Nations , and the declaration of 1968 as the " International Year of Human Rights " provided the impetus to take up the question of human rights in armed conflicts . 

  The 1965 Red Cross resolution was affirmed by a unanimous vote of the UN General Assembly , but with the omission of the specific statement that the law of war applies to nuclear weapons . 

  This was the price of the Great Powers' support for the resolution , and is illustrative of their attitude to the question since 1945 . 

  The Great Powers , and in particular the USA and the UK , further conditioned their participation in the new round of Geneva Conferences also on the non-applicability to nuclear weapons of the resulting agreements . 

  These were the latest and in many ways most impressive codification of the law of war , the 1977 Geneva Protocols additional to the 1949 Conventions . 

  The British and US governments , which have both signed but not yet ratified these Protocols , were the only signatories to make the explicit reservation " that the new rules introduced by the Protocol are not intended to have any effect on and do not regulate or prohibit the use of nuclear weapons " . 

  The absence in the 1977 Protocols , and indeed in any other convention on the law of war , to any specific reference to nuclear weapons , as well as the explicit refusal of the Great Powers to accept any such reference , is significant . 

  However , it certainly does not mean that the use of nuclear weapons is perfectly legal under the laws of war as they have evolved in this century . 

  As we have seen , the laws of war do not consist only of what states have formally agreed to accept in a treaty or convention . 

  On the contrary , the conventions have usually consisted of an attempt to formalise , under popular and humanitarian pressure , rules that must be considered as generally applicable . 

  Furthermore , those rules are based on general principles which apply to all armed conflicts and means of warfare . 

  It is plain that these general principles of the laws of war do apply to nuclear weapons . 

  The question is how they apply to these weapons , and why the Great Powers have continued to avoid any explicit acknowledgment that the laws of war can apply in any respect to nuclear weapons ; and finally how should the mobilisation of world public opinion and political action be directed to ensuring the effective outlawing of these weapons . 

  It is to these questions that I now turn . 

  THE APPLICATION OF THE LAWS OF WAR TO NUCLEAR WEAPONS 

  The period of development of the laws of war up to 1914 saw the establishment of two basic principles which continue to be applicable and are relevant to nuclear weapons . 

  The first is the principle of limitation of the means of warfare . 

  This was embodied in the Brussels Code of 1874 and the Regulations of the 1907 Hague Convention in the general rule that " Belligerents have not got an unlimited right as to the choice of means of injuring the enemy " . 

  It was further expressed in the outlawing of certain categories of weapon , " poison or poisoned weapons " and " arms , projectiles or material calculated to cause unnecessary suffering " . 

  It has been in implementation of this principle that states have agreed on specific treaty obligations banning chemical and gas weapons , culminating in the 1925 Geneva Protocol banning Asphyxiating , Poisonous or other Gases and Bacteriological Methods of Warfare . 

  Once again , it is generally understood and accepted that the weapons prohibited are not limited to those specifically mentioned in this Protocol or any other treaty , but extend to all those that come under this description or have this effect . 

  The 1925 Protocol itself makes this clear by referring explicitly to " other " gases . 

  It is by this inclusion also of other similar weapons that states have accepted that tear-gas is banned ; the only exception to this has been the USA , which did not in any case ratify the Protocol until 1975 . 

  The USA had taken the dissenting and somewhat paradoxical view that it would not be proper to prohibit the use in war of a gas which a state might ask its police to use against its own people . 

  When it finally ratified the Protocol in 1975 the USA further expressed its " understanding " that the Protocol does not cover control agents and herbicides , although for itself the USA agreed to limit their use . 

  Britain's previously firm stand against tear-gas was significantly undermined by a government statement in 1970 that it did not consider CS and similar gases to be covered by the Protocol . 

  This was apparently justified by arguing that CS " smoke " is different from the earlier types of tear-gas . 

  It is revealing that the British and American governments are reluctant to accept as illegal and inhumane in international conflicts weapons with which they are willing to arm their police forces for use against their own people . 

  This attitude is linked to their refusal to accept that the prohibition of inhumane weapons applies to nuclear weapons . 

  It is again an attempt to retreat to the position that only those weapons are prohibited which are specifically referred to in a ratified treaty . 

  This , as we have seen , is a rejection of the basic principles of the international humanitarian law of armed conflict . 

  It is not possible to evade the prohibition of asphyxiating , poisonous and other gases simply by calling the weapons " control agents and herbicides " . 

  It is equally difficult to deny that the radioactive fall-out from a nuclear explosion in fact consists of a cloud of poisonous gases . 

  It may be possible , while accepting the underlying general principle , to argue against its applicability to nuclear weapons : for instance , by saying that a nuclear bomb is not a chemical weapon as such , the poison gas being a mere incidental by-product ; or to go back to the fundamental prohibition of " weapons that cause unnecessary suffering " and argue that the suffering caused by a nuclear weapon is not disproportionate to its military effectiveness . 

  Indeed , military effectiveness has long been argued in favour of the acceptability of new weapons however horrifying , going back to the British attempt to defend the use of " dum-dum " bullets against " savages " in the Colonies ( Best , 1980 , p. 162 ) . 

  Military necessity was never a strong argument and was frequently rejected even by many of the military who are only too aware of the dangers of cruel methods being introduced into a conflict . 

  However , military necessity has always been a dangerous principle when counterposed to the principle of humanitarian limitation of the means of warfare . 

  Military necessity should rather be seen as subject to , or forming an aspect of , the overriding principle of economy or proportionality in the use of force ( McDougal and Feliciano , 1958 , pp . 797-8 ) . 

  The massive destructiveness of nuclear weapons makes it very difficult to justify them as " effective " weapons in this sense . 

  This helps to explain why those who wish to justify the legality of nuclear weapons generally avoid the necessity argument , and prefer to deny altogether that the laws of war apply to these weapons . 

  The second basic historical principle is that of discrimination in the use of force : that the use of weapons should be directed at military targets and should as far as possible avoid damage to the civilian population and buildings such as churches , museums , historic monuments and hospitals , as well as neutral states and their nationals . 

  Thus the Hague rules prohibited the bombardment of undefended towns and villages . 

  In the 1920s and 1930s attempts to codify rules of air warfare based on this general principle failed to result in the drawing-up of a detailed Convention . 

  However , at the onset of the Second World War both Germany and Britain accepted that these principles applied to air warfare . 

  This is not the place to discuss in detail why it was that despite this both Britain and Germany indulged in " area bombing " . 

  A fairly dispassionate analysis by Best ( 1980 ) indicates that the initiation of area bombing of cities resulted from the rejection of strategic in favour of indiscriminate bombing by those in charge of British Bomber Command , and the acceptance of their arguments by Churchill in August 1940 , when the Luftwaffe's attacks on British airfields in the Battle of Britain was threatening to damage irretrievably the RAF's powers of retaliation ( Best , 1980 , p. 276 ) . 

  Despite the change of circumstances by 1944 , British Bomber Command continued area bombing , contrary to military advice , and alone , since the Luftwaffe had shot its bolt and the USAAF still held to precision bombing . 

  This policy culminated in the Dresden raid in 1945 , in which the USAAF also joined . 

  The enormity and futility of this raid finally swung opinion against city bombing . 

  Nevertheless , it can not be doubted that indiscriminate bombing of cities helped to prepare the ( a ) moral climate in which the atomic bomb could be used against Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 

  The question that is raised is whether the history of indiscriminate city bombing and the actual use of atomic bombs on cities has vitiated the prohibition on indiscriminate use of weapons , especially the use of weapons not directed at military targets or which inevitably involve disproportionate damage to civilians . 

  Certainly the growth of " total war " in the twentieth century has drawn populations into the war effort in ways that have made it increasingly difficult to maintain the principle of protection of the civilian population . 

  However , two major points rule out the view that this means that indiscriminate attacks ( including the use of nuclear weapons ) are how legitimate . 

  First , even the commanders who authorised such attacks did not justify them as legitimate in themselves , but only as reprisals : a use of means unlawful in themselves but legitimate in retaliation against unlawful attacks by the enemy . 

  In fact the unlawfulness of indiscriminate attacks was generally accepted and to a great extent maintained : although London , Coventry , Hamburg and Dresden were bombed , Paris , Rome , Oxford and Edinburgh were not . 

  The arguments among wartime commanders focused both on the ineffectiveness of indiscriminate bombing ( there was strong evidence , confirmed in post-war surveys , that it did little to disrupt war production and had a reverse effect on popular morale ) , as well as legal and moral unacceptability . 

  Second , state leaders' own doubts about the acceptability of indiscriminate attacks , even as reprisals , were put beyond question by the revulsion that followed Dresden , Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 

  This moment was a significant turning-point . 

  The political and ideological factors that had led to popular support for and involvement in the inter-imperialist war of 1914-18 and the anti-fascist war of 1939-45 could no longer be used to justify the use of means of warfare which , it became clear , not only involved disproportionate suffering but endangered the future of humanity . 

  Although Cold War ideology and initial public ignorance in the West of the horrific power of nuclear weapons at first muted the public pressures behind a renewed expression of the unacceptability of indiscriminate means of warfare , the growth of the popular movement for peace over the past twenty-five years and especially in its recent phase must now lead to a reaffirmation of the principle and its application to nuclear weapons . 

  An important phase in this was achieved in the diplomatic efforts initiated by the Red Cross Resolution of 1965 which eventually led to the 1977 Geneva Protocols , discussed in the previous section . 

  These Protocols restated , and in several important respects developed , the laws of armed conflict . 

  Article 35 of the First protocol restates the basic rules of limitation of the methods and means of warfare and the prohibition of methods and means " of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering " ; to this it adds a prohibition of methods or means " which are intended or may be expected to cause widespread , long-term and severe damage to the natural environment " . 

  Article 36 emphasises the general applicability of these basic principles : 

  This provision clearly attempts to prevent the development of any new weapon the use of which may be illegal . 

  In a number of provisions the 1977 Protocols seek to restate the principles of the laws of war so as to make as clear as possible the unacceptability of " total war " . 

  This is most clearly seen in the provisions for the protection of the civilian population , in Part IV of the First Protocol . 

  This begins with the basic rule : Article 50 gives a quite strict definition of civilian , and Article 51 outlaws attacks on the civilian population and indiscriminate attacks . 

  These are defined as follows : 

  ( a ) 

  those which are not directed at a specific military objective ; 

  ( b ) 

  those which employ a method or means of combat which can not be directed at a specific military objective ; or 

  ( c ) 

  those which employ a method or means of combat the effects of which can not be limited as required by this Protocol ; and consequently , in each such case , are of a nature to strike military objectives and civilians or civilian objects without distinction . 

  Furthermore , Article 51(6 ) explicitly provides that " Attacks against the civilian population or civilians by way of reprisal are prohibited " . 

  This is especially important since , as mentioned above , the indiscriminate attacks of the 1939-45 War were generally justified as reprisals . 

  Moreover , ever since the failure of attempts to include restrictions on retaliation or reprisals in the Brussels Code of 1874 , there has been no explicit prohibition of reprisals in the codes of the laws of war . 

  The inclusion of this explicit provision in 1977 is undoubtedly a result of the experience of twentieth-century conflicts that the prohibition of attacks on the civilian population is ineffective unless it explicitly includes reprisals , and it therefore constitutes a highly significant development of international law . 

  The detailed way in which the 1977 Protocols spell out the principle of discrimination in the use of force and protection of the civilian population makes it plain that there are no circumstances in which nuclear weapons could actually be used without breaching this fundamental principle . 

  Since the breach of this principle is prohibited even in reprisal , the indiscriminate nature of nuclear weapons makes their use illegal even in self-defence or as second-strike weapons . 

  It may be possible , hypothetically , to imagine a use of a small nuclear explosion in a remote region in a way that does not necessarily involve indiscriminate harm to the civilian population or long-term damage to the natural environment . 

  But in practical terms even the so-called " tactical " or " battlefield " nuclear weapons by their nature have indiscriminate effects . 

  They would not be employed in remote regions , but in " theatre " warfare , most likely in populated areas such as central Europe or the Middle East . 

  They would not be employed singly but rather , once authorisation was given to employ them , it would mean tens , hundreds or even thousands of nuclear explosions , however " small " . 

  Therefore even if we accept the military estimates of the " probable " accuracy of such weapons ( 300 metres or more for " tactical " weapons , with somewhat greater accuracy for the " battlefield " types ) this still means the statistical inevitability of some inaccuracy ( Weston , 1983 ; United Nations , 1981 ; Krass and Smith , 1982 ) . 

  Above all , however accurate such weapons may turn out to be in practice , their yield in terms of blast and fall-out clearly marks them out from " conventional " weapons and necessarily entails indiscriminate effects . 

  It was these implications of the greater clarity introduced by the Geneva Protocols on the prohibition of indiscriminate weapons that led the British government , in addition to its general reservation excluding their applicability to nuclear weapons , to formulate further specific reservations in respect of what may constitute a military objective . 

  As part of the clarification of the prohibition of indiscriminate attacks , Article 52 of the First Geneva Protocol provided : 

  It further adds that an object " normally dedicated to civilian purposes , such as a place of worship , a house or other dwelling or a school " shall in case of doubt be presumed to be making no effective contribution to military action . 

  The British government has attempted virtually to nullify this definition of military objectives by stating its " understanding " that " a specific area of land " may be a military objective . 

  This seems clearly outside the spirit of the principle of discrimination . 

  Although one may talk of the " total or partial destruction " of an object such as a building or a railway yard which may be a military objective , it is quite different , and unacceptable , to speak of the destruction of an area of land . 

  The provisions of the 1977 Protocols therefore consist of a reaffirmation of the existing general principles and their reformulation and adaptation on the basis of the experience of twentieth-century conflicts and to meet new needs . 

  In some respects they use new language and embody in a formal text rules that have not been specified in that way before ; this has indeed been the way the laws of war have developed for 150 years . 

  For example , the prohibition of weapons that damage the natural environment is new , although it is linked to and flows from the prohibition of means of warfare causing unnecessary suffering . 

  Even more so , the detailed provisions on protection of the civilian population restate , build upon and extend previous formulations . 

  Yet , as we have seen , there is a symbiotic relationship between the formal codes of the laws of war and the generally accepted rules which must apply if humanity is to triumph over warfare . 

  Just as it was possible to try the major war criminals after 1945 on the basis of generally accepted principles ( to which the Hague and Geneva codes contributed ) , so the 1977 Protocols must be taken as the clearest formulation of the laws presently applicable to armed conflict , including the use of nuclear weapons . 

  Indeed , the explicit reservation by the USA and the UK excluding the " new rules " in the Protocols from any effect on the use of nuclear weapons in a sense serves to confirm their appropriateness and relevance to the use of these weapons . 

  It is above all nuclear weapons that constitute a " total " use of armed force . 

  By their very nature their use would breach the fundamental principles prohibiting unnecessary suffering , long-term damage to the natural environment and indiscriminate attacks harming the civilian population . 

  To deny that these clear and generally accepted principles apply to nuclear weapons is effectively to say that these weapons are outside international law , that nuclear weapons in themselves abolish international law . 

  Indeed , this has in effect been the argument made by many international lawyers in the years after Hiroshima . 

  Since it was impossible to envisage the use of nuclear weapons in any way consistent with the laws of war , and since great and apparently law-abiding Powers possessed and threatened to use them , they must be held to be simply beyond the scope of international law , 

  A different , and in some respects more constructive , approach adopted by some international lawyers ( especially Cassese , 1979 ) points to the weakness in terms of effective enforcement of a prohibition of weapons based only on the argument that they can not be used without violation of the general principles of the humanitarian law of war . 

  This view accepts that these general principles can apply to render illegal the use of weapons , even new weapons , which are not covered by any specific ban . 

  The difficulty is that the applicability of such general principles is subject to divergent interpretations ; in the absence of any authoritative international bodies entitled to give an impartial view , Cassese argues that " the implementation of the general principles on weapons turns on the military strength of belligerents : strong States can dodge the bans without fear . 

  The only " sanction " against them is to resort to world public opinion' ( Cassese , 1979 , p. 165 ) . 

  A slightly different argument is made by Paust ( 1983 ) who argues that general principles must be accepted as applying to new weapons , but they must be coupled with effective enforcement measures . 

  It is certainly true that states have in the past used methods and means of warfare not outlawed by any specific prohibition although running counter to general principles , and they have sought to justify this by reference either to the principle of reprisal or that of military effectiveness . 

  It is not clear however that it has been the stronger adversary which has done so , rather than a weaker party with its back to the wall . 

  Furthermore , it is important to consider carefully the role of " international public opinion " . 

  Those who rule states must always consider the ideological acceptability of their policies to their own people , as well as to people in other countries . 

  As we have already mentioned , there were many factors which contributed to the trends to " total war " in the first half of the twentieth century . 

  Very few of these factors apply to the use of nuclear weapons . 

  There can be no doubt of the widespread feelings of horror felt across the world at the thought of the use of nuclear weapons , in however " limited " a way , and therefore the unacceptability of the view that their use could be justified as legitimate . 

  Any legitimacy that nuclear weapons may have is in respect not of their potential use , but as regards their possession as a means of " deterrence " . 

  It is therefore important to analyse the implications of the arguments about illegality of the use of nuclear weapons for arguments about possession , deterrence and disarmament . 

  NUCLEAR STRATEGIES AND ILLEGALITY 

  As we have pointed out , the humanitarian laws of war are concerned with the jus in bello , the rules governing the legitimate means of conflict once it has started . 

  This is traditionally considered as quite separate from the jus ad bellum which governs the legitimacy of resort to the use of force . 

  Although the two are separate , they must be considered as clearly linked : if the use of a weapon is illegal in any or certain circumstances , then it is illegal to initiate a conflict by using it . 

  The two can also be seen to be linked in that the principles involved in the doctrine of reprisals ( which is considered to form part of the jus in bello ) are essentially the same as those of the doctrine of self-defence in relation to the initiation of conflict . 

  Finally , although arms control and disarmament have generally been dealt with by states in specific agreements , the progress ( or lack of progress ) on the outlawing of weapons has clearly been linked to the progress made in identifying weaponry whose use is illegal . 

  For example , the outlawing of the use of chemical and bacteriological weapons , which was made explicit in the 1925 Protocol , laid the basis for an acceptance by states that the development and possession of such weapons should be outlawed , which was agreed in the 1972 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development , Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological ( Biological ) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction . 

  Furthermore , as mentioned above , Article 36 of the 1977 Geneva Protocol I imposed a duty on states to consider in the development or acquisition of new weapons whether their use would be illegal in some or all circumstances . 

  Although this does not actually prohibit the possession of weapons whose use is illegal , it is clearly moving in that direction . 

  For a number of reasons , therefore , it seems rather over-simplistic and legalistic merely to state baldly that , whatever may be the position on the illegality of use of nuclear weapons , their possession as such is not illegal ( Brownlie , 1984 ) . 

  Even in narrow legal terms , possession and use can not be separated absolutely ; but the notion of mere " possession " breaks down when it is considered in its military and political context . 

  Nuclear weapons , like any other weapons , are not merely " possessed " : they are deployed , as part of a specific military strategy . 

  Viewed in this way it is clear why the separation of rules governing the use of means of warfare from those on the initiation of conflict has proved increasingly difficult to maintain . 

  The deployment of a weapon system involves a threat that that system will be used in certain circumstances which to some extent can be deduced from the characteristics of the weapon system itself . 

  The legality of the threat of use of a weapon therefore depends on an evaluation both of the characteristics of the weapon and of the possible circumstances in which it might be used . 

  Since 1945 the UN Charter has imposed on all states the obligation to avoid the use or threat of force ( Article 2 ) , while reserving to them the " inherent right ... to self-defence if an armed attack occurs " ( Article 51 ) . 

  In general , therefore , military preparedness must be adjudged legally valid only to the extent that it constitutes a threat to use force in circumstances amounting to legitimate self-defence . 

  An argument can certainly be made that , since it is the very characteristics of nuclear weapons which make their use illegal , any deployment of nuclear weapons which involves a threat of their use is an illegal threat of force . 

  Most other weapons can not be considered to have characteristics that make their use illegal whatever the circumstances ; although some others perhaps do -- for example , bacteriological weapons , which can equally be argued to be per se illegal . 

  As we have argued above , since all nuclear weapons are indiscriminate and inhumane , their use even in reprisal is illegal . 

  In addition to the principles governing reprisals , the legality of a threat of use of force in self-defence depends on compliance with the basic principles that self-defence must be a matter of overwhelming necessity and must be proportionate to the force used in the initial attack . 

  Applying these criteria , it seems to me that the type of deployment of nuclear weapons which can most clearly be argued to entail an illegal threat of force is one which involves a threat of first use of nuclear weapons . 

  Until recently , the nuclear deployments of the superpowers have been based on " countervalue " targeting , within the doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction ( MAD ) . 

  This type of deployment does not of its nature necessarily entail any first-strike threat , and indeed the " deterrence " ideology justifies it as a retaliatory threat only . 

  Since the type of all-out attack involved in the " assured destruction " scenario would clearly be indiscriminate and inhumane , and therefore illegal even in self-defence , it can be argued that even this type of deployment entails an illegal threat of force . 

  This seems to be the view of Weston , whose conclusion after an exhaustive analysis is that " the threat of a strategic first strike , a tactical first strike , a second countervalue strike , and possibly also a second counterforce strike as well as most tactical second strikes " would fit the logic of illegality ( Weston , 1983 , p. 587 ) . 

  However , influenced by the fact that the deterrence policy is firmly adhered to by the governments of the superpowers and has some political acceptability , and that the traditional doctrine of the laws of war did not apply to preparation for war , his eventual conclusion is that it would be difficult to state that any measures short of use are illegal . 

  Weston's difficulty once again seems to stem from accepting too readily an undifferentiated view of " possession " . 

  The flaw lies in his initial premise that if the use of a weapon is illegal , then " any threat of such use -- including not only an ostentatious brandishing of arms ( such as a menacing " demonstration burst " ) , but also their research and development , manufacture , stockpiling and deployment " must be illegal . 

  He thus seems to go too far initially , and then shrink back to an anodyne conclusion . 

  This emphasises the need to analyse within the political and strategic context whether a particular deployment amounts to an illegal threat of force . 

  Viewed in this political and strategic context , the possession of strategic nuclear weapons as part of the MAD strategy exhibits a stark contradiction . 

  As countervalue weapons , aimed at large-scale societal destruction , their use would be illegal even in retaliation . 

  However , their deployment is justified in nuclear ideology , not as a potential self-defence second-strike force , but on the basis that they will never have to be used , since their possession alone deters a potential enemy , and therefore it does not constitute a threat to use illegal weapons . 

  Nevertheless , none of the superpowers have been willing to say that they would not actually use these weapons in a second nuclear strike , on the grounds that for the deterrent to be credible the other side has to be convinced that a first nuclear strike would result in nuclear retaliation . 

  It is for this reason that all the superpowers have effectively conspired to exclude nuclear weapons from the ambit of the laws of war . 

  Yet it is this deadly logic of deterrence that condemns the world to live under the shadow of the threat of nuclear annihilation . 

  The determination and effective preparedness of the nuclear powers to mount an instant all-out nuclear counter-strike the moment it perceives itself to be under nuclear attack must be condemned as an illegitimate threat of force , and is rightly so condemned by the world's peace movement . 

  It is only saved from universal condemnation by the partial political acceptance of the argument that this nuclear readiness does not in practice involve a real threat and that nuclear weapons will in fact never be used . 

  The implication of this perspective is that it is possible to give only a limited and provisional legitimacy to strategic nuclear weapons deployed as a second-strike " deterrent " threat . 

  Their deployment is legitimate only as long as the world can accept that there is no real threat of their use . 

  It must therefore be accompanied by an acceptance by the nuclear powers of ( 1 ) a renunciation of their use , including ( and especially ) a pledge of no-first-strike even in the event of a conventional attack ; and ( 2 ) the acceptance of a duty to disarm . 

  These are essentially the conclusions of Richard Falk ( Falk , 1983 ) . 

  It is worth quoting in full the considerations put forward by Falk that must underlie a " beneficial international law regime for nuclear weapons " : 

  ( a ) 

  public support for the idea that any actual use of nuclear weapons would violate the international law of war and would constitute a crime against humanity , ; 

  ( b ) 

  public support for the rule that a first use of nuclear weapons , even in a defensive mode in response to or in reasonable anticipation of a prior non-nuclear armed attack , would violate international law and would constitute a crime against humanity ; 

  ( c ) 

  it follows from ( b ) that weapons systems ( even at the research and development stage ) , war plans , strategic doctrines , and diplomatic threats that have first strike characteristics are per se illegal , and that those political leaders , engineers , scientists and defence workers knowingly associated with such " first strike " roles are engaged in a continuing criminal enterprise ; 

  ( d ) 

  a definite consensus that second or retaliatory uses of nuclear weapons against cities and primarily civilian targets violate international law and constitute a crime against humanity ; 

  ( e ) 

  a clear obligation , recognised by all nuclear weapons states and by other states as well , to pursue arms control in the direction of minimising the role of nuclear weapons in conflict behaviour through negotiations in good faith ; this obligation is a provision , art . 

  VI , of the widely-ratified Non-Proliferation Treaty , and is embodied in general terms as well in the Charter of the United Nations and in a variety of formal resolutions adopted over the years by the General Assembly ; and 

  ( f ) 

  a definite mandate directed towards citizens to take whatever steps are available to them to achieve a law-oriented foreign policy for their own country , including , as both conscience and good sense dictate , non-violent acts of civil disobedience , and efforts to persuade members of all branches of government to overcome the gap that separates the normative consensus of the public as to the illegality of the use of nuclear weapons from prevailing official policies . 

  ( Falk , 1983 , pp . 537-8 ) 

  Falk advances these principles in the awareness that , pending the actual abolition of nuclear weapons , a different , and much more dangerous conclusion can be drawn from the argument about the illegality of nuclear weapons . 

  This argument has become an important factor in recent debates about a new escalation of the arms race and major changes of nuclear strategy involved in the Star Wars proposal ( the Strategic Defence Initiative ) as well as proposals for new weapons systems based on new technologies . 

  An important ideological component of these arguments has been the illegality ( and immorality ) of basing the defence of the West on the threat of Mutual Assured Destruction . 

  Since the large-scale use of nuclear weapons would be clearly illegal , it is argued that it is immoral and unconvincing to base a defence on the threat of such use . 

  Furthermore , it is said , a defensive strategy based on such weapons effectively rules out the actual use of nuclear weapons . 

  The argument for a so-called " invulnerable " defence system based on Star Wars , to replace the nuclear deterrent , therefore goes hand-in-hand with the proposals for the development of new weapons systems including " limited " nuclear weapons , whose use can actually be envisaged and planned . 

  The support that such strategic arguments seek to obtain from international law can be seen in a significant study done for the Rand Corporation ( Builder and Graubard , 1982 ) . 

  These authors argue that , in the absence of a specific treaty prohibition nuclear weapons are not per se illegal . 

  Although they accept that the laws of war apply to the use of these weapons , their conclusion is that " they can be used lawfully if civilians are not made the object of attack and if collateral injury to civilians is not disproportionate to the military advantage being sought " ( Builder and Graubard , 1982 , p. viii ) . 

  This however is a serious misuse of the principle of military effectiveness , which is especially horrifying in the context of discussion of the use of nuclear weapons . 

  As I have already pointed out , even so-called " tactical " nuclear weapons are in reality indiscriminate in their effect . 

  To argue that it may be permissible to lay waste large areas of any country and its people in order to gain a " military advantage " is to employ the justificatory arguments of the war criminal . 

  The implications which these authors seek to deduce is that , since it is wrong to base a strategic doctrine on a potential illegal use of weapons , the policy of deterrence based on assured destruction should be " declaratory " only , and that actual plans should be based on the development , deployment and targeting of weapons which " should be intended for use only against military objectives and be as discriminate as reasonably possible in their collateral effects upon the civilian population and property " ( Builder and Graubard , 1982 , p. 51 ) . 

  Since they accept that some types of nuclear weapons can be used in this way , the argument is designed to legitimise the development and deployment of tactical or " counterforce " nuclear weapons and other weaponry associated with a shift away from Mutual Assured Destruction towards Nuclear Utilisation Target Selection ( MAD versus NUTS : see Keeny and Panofsky , 1981 ) . 

  As Falk points out , Builder himself has argued for such a shift ( Builder , 1979 ) . 

  This new hawkish perspective builds upon a strand in US policy going back at least to Kennedy , which argues that the USA must possess a force structure that would enable a nuclear war to be fought and won ( Ikle , 1973 ) . 

  The recent reinforcement of this trend has been attributed to a weakening of credibility of deterrence based in what is seen as " America's strategic predicament " , defined as : 

  In other words , American imperialism demands military superiority over Soviet imperialism . 

  In the current political and strategic context , it seems right to conclude , with Falk , that in the application of international law to nuclear weapons it is of overriding importance to minimise reliance on nuclear weapons and emphasise the sharp distinction between conventional and nuclear weapons ( Falk , 1983 , p. 538 ) . 

  The illogicality and immorality of the Rand study and similar approaches is in the pretence that a " limited " use of nuclear weapons could be envisaged which would not be contrary to the humanitarian laws of war . 

  As Keeny and Panofsky put it : 

  THE DUTY TO DISARM 

  As I have argued above , the doctrine of deterrence and the deployment of strategic nuclear weapons can only be justified by the acceptance that the superpowers are genuine in their protestations that they do not intend ever to use nuclear weapons , and that they seek disarmament . 

  This political reality translates into law as a duty to pursue disarmament actively and in good faith . 

  As Falk points out , this duty has already found legal form in Article VI of the Non-Proliferation Treaty , as well as in the UN Charter and General Assembly resolutions . 

  The effectivity of the duty to disarm is probably the most crucial issue in international law and international relations of this era . 

  The criticisms that have been levelled at the Non-Proliferation Treaty have at their base the inequality of the bargain between the major powers who have nuclear weapons and the non-nuclear powers who have accepted the undertaking not to acquire them . 

  Although the NPT has succeeded in retarding the spread of nuclear weapons , there is no doubt that the treaty will collapse unless significant progress is made towards nuclear disarmament by the nuclear powers . 

  As part of the duty to disarm I would also add the duty to control and limit the spread of nuclear power and nuclear technology generally . 

  Studies of the nuclear fuel cycle show that it is impossible to insulate the development of nuclear power from the capacity to build nuclear weapons . 

  Quite aside from the inherent dangers of establishing an energy system to any significant degree reliant on highly unstable nuclear technology , the implications of the spread of nuclear power for the extension of military nuclear capability must be taken much more seriously than it has been hitherto ( SIPRI , 1979 , 1980 , 1980A ) . 

  A legal duty is in itself meaningless unless the political pressures exist to enforce it . 

  Indeed , it is quite clear that the only effective power that can enforce the duty to disarm is the world-wide popular mobilisation against nuclear weapons . 

  In advancing legal arguments and in taking direct political action those active in the peace movement can be reinforced by the knowledge that the hesitant political support given by others to the policies of nuclear deterrence is underpinned only by the belief that their leaders genuinely desire peace and disarmament . 

  There is therefore the broadest possible political consensus behind the pressures to enforce such a duty to disarm . 

  The only counter-pressure comes from the dark side of human nature , the tear of " the enemy " . 

  A major role for the peace movement is therefore to help to overcome this fear , and to work actively to put forward constructive disarmament suggestions , and to continue to take the necessary political actions to ensure that the issue remains in the forefront of public attention . 

  This is above all important today , when the process of disarmament is at a turning-point . 

  It is frequently pointed out that , compared with the previous dismal history of negotiations for disarmament , the past twenty-five years have seen an exceptional success in the conclusion of nuclear arms limitation agreements . 

  Already , Japan and Germany had accepted the obligation never to maintain nuclear forces ( the former under the MacArthur Constitution of 1947 , the latter under the 1954 Protocol to the Western European Union Treaty ) . 

  International non-nuclear zones have been agreed in respect of Antarctica ( Antarctic Treaty 1959 ) , Latin America ( Treaty of Tlatelolco 1967 ) , Outer Space ( Outer Space Treaty 1967 ) , the seabed ( Seabed Arms Control Treaty of 1971 ) , and the moon ( draft Moon Treaty 1979 ) . 

  Over ninety states have accepted the obligation not to acquire nuclear arms under the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty ; although this treaty has not prevented the detonation of a nuclear device by India and the covert acquisition of nuclear capacity also by Israel and South Africa , the total list of nuclear powers is relatively small , and perhaps less than may have been predicted a few years ago . 

  Nevertheless , the proliferation that has occurred is serious , since it entails an acquisition of nuclear weaponry by states whose ruling groups may become desperate enough to use it . 

  However , it is not the world's statesmen that we have to thank for even this limited achievement in arms control , but the women and men whose political activity has ensured that some action must be taken . 

  These were also the pressures behind the limited progress made between the superpowers : it is the world-wide mobilisation against nuclear testing that ensured the conclusion and adherence to the limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 . 

  Finally , the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty and Protocol of 1974 has limited the development of new ABMs , and the SALT Interim Agreement ( SALT I 1972 ) set limits to the growth of the strategic arsenals . 

  However , it is equally plain that these agreements have been no more than limited curbs on the growth of nuclear weaponry . 

  The central problem of arms reduction and the elimination of nuclear weapons remains . 

  Moreover , as the breakdown of the SALT II agreement shows , whatever the success of arms limitation , it does not overcome but in many ways merely highlights the problems of arms reduction ( Jacobson , 1984 ) . 

  In the writings and arguments of " experts " these problems are frequently represented as technical ones , and too specialised for the ordinary person to grasp . 

  Disarmament , for example , is sometimes said to hinge on apparently technical problems such as the comparability of forces , or the possibility of verification . 

  The difficulty of solving such problems may be used to justify solutions based on a " new technological fix " ( rightly dismissed by Goldblat elsewhere in this volume ) such as " Star Wars " , which simply involves a new whirl of the arms race spiral . 

  It is therefore important for the peace movement to penetrate and politicise the apparently technical arguments of the " experts " , and to demonstrate that there is no technical inevitability , but they are social problems to which human solutions can and must be found . 

  It is in this spirit that I have attempted to analyse the technical-legal issues surrounding the debate about the illegality of nuclear weapons . 

  Legal issues , like other technical problems , can only be properly understood within their broader social context , and this is especially so when our purpose is not only to understand the world , but to change it . " 

  The Relevance of Laws of War in the Nuclear Age 

  ROBERT ADAMS 

  The laws of war ought to have a great deal to say about , or rather against , the use of nuclear weaponry . 

  They have , after all , been traditionally concerned with restricting the use of weapons which are considered indiscriminate or inhumane . 

  However , the numerous formal international agreements on the laws of war actually say nothing directly on nuclear weapons . 

  This apparent failure of the laws of war to tackle directly a class of weapon which is spectacularly indiscriminate and inhumane raises a number of questions , namely : 

  1 . 

  What do the various international agreements on the laws of war say which has a bearing on the legality or otherwise of nuclear weapons use ? 

  2 . 

  Do other sources of law ( including international custom , court decisions , or the opinions of writers ) help to establish some definite laws of war rules about the legality or otherwise of nuclear weapons use ? 

  3 . 

  Why have the laws of war not addressed the nuclear weapons question more successfully ? 

  4 . 

  Despite their weaknesses , are the laws of war still relevant in the nuclear age ? 

  5 . 

  Could the laws of war be further developed to address the nuclear weapons question more directly and explicitly ? 

  These questions are considered in turn in this chapter . 

  Some of them are of necessity considered briefly -- even in shorthand form -- and the reader seeking further elucidation is referred to the sources mentioned in the text . 

  THE LAWS OF WAR , AND RELATED BODIES OF LAW 

  The laws of war , otherwise known as jus in bello , govern the actual conduct of armed conflicts and military occupations . 

  It is an ancient body of law , largely customary in its origins , which , since the mid-nineteenth century , has come to be largely but not completely codified in the form of binding multilateral international conventions ( Schindler and Toman , 1981 ; Roberts and Guelff , 1982 ) . 

  A main preoccupation of the laws of war has always been placing limits on the scope and ferocity of war : hence the large number of rules restricting the use of indiscriminate weapons ; and protecting neutrals , civilians and prisoners of war . 

  This whole body of law deals essentially with the use of weapons once an armed conflict has actually broken out . 

  It does not deal directly with possession of weapons , nor with the legitimacy of resort to war in the first place . 

  Apart from the laws of war , many other parts of international law have a bearing on issues related to nuclear weapons . 

  One is the body of law containing rules governing the resort to armed conflict ( jus ad bellum ) . 

  A second is the body of law governing the production , testing , stockpiling , transfer and deployment of weapons and armed forces ( the law of arms control and disarmament ) . 

  These parts of international law , distinct from each other as they are , all overlap at one point or another and can not be considered entirely in isolation . 

  Thus jus in bello turns out to have considerable implications for conduct in peace-time , including in time of crisis . 

  Furthermore , both jus ad bellum and the law of arms control turn out to have relevance to the actual conduct of armed conflict . 

  For example , modern jus ad bellum puts considerable emphasis on the right of self-defence in accord with Articles 2(4 ) and 51 of the UN Charter : the implication of these provisions is that any use of force , even after the outbreak of fighting , is prohibited if it can not be justified by reference to the right of self-defence recognised in Article 51 of the Charter . 

  As Christopher Greenwood ( 1983 , 223-4 ) has said : 

  Similarly , the law of arms control and disarmament may impose substantial restrictions on the conduct of armed conflict . 

  While some agreements in this area might not endure for long during a war , others might be more effective ( Towle , 1980 ) . 

  Furthermore , the various commitments by the nuclear powers , made in connection with the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty , not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear states , undoubtedly have the effect of limiting the freedom of action of nuclear powers even during an armed conflict ( Goldblat and Lodgaard , 1980 ) . 

  International Agreements on the Laws of War 

  Formal multilateral agreements are by no means the only source of the laws of war . 

  After all , the laws of war existed in some form long before the idea of the modern multilateral treaty had been invented . 

  Moreover , in dealing with a phenomenon as complex as war -- which produces an infinite variety of situations and is conducted by means whose technical features alter almost from year to year -- there are inherent difficulties in laying down the law in the form of treaties . 

  Thus it has always been recognised , and rightly so , that there is a large place in the laws of war for other sources of law : custom , general principles of law , judicial decisions , and the writings of highly-qualified legal experts . 

  Of the twenty-five-odd multilateral agreements on the laws of war which are currently in force , many contain either specific provisions , or important statements of general principle , which have potential relevance to the question of nuclear weapons use . 

  The first is the 1868 St Petersburg Declaration , which was indeed the first major international agreement prohibiting the use of a particular weapon in warfare -- namely the explosive bullet . 

  Its preambular section says : 

  The 1907 Hague Convention IV on Land War contains further statements of broad principle which are seemingly relevant to the nuclear question . 

  In the Regulations which are annexed to the Convention , Article 22 states : " The right of belligerents to adopt means of injuring the enemy is not unlimited " . 

  In addition , Article 23 says that it is especially forbidden ( a ) " to employ poison or poisoned weapons " ; ( d ) " to declare that no quarter will be given " ; and ( e ) " to employ arms , projectiles or material calculated to cause unnecessary suffering " . 

  The 1907 Hague Convention IV also contains an important provision in the preamble to the main convention , in what has come to be known as the Martens clause . 

  This was drawn up on account of the difficulty which the negotiators at The Hague had in agreeing whether or not irregular forces in occupied territory might or might not qualify for combatant status , but its words have a wider relevance : 

  Another agreement concluded at the same conference , namely the 1907 Hague Convention V on Neutrality in Land War , also has relevant provisions , especially Article 1 : " The territory of neutral powers is inviolable " . 

  Any use of nuclear weapons which resulted in significant fall-out coming down in neutral countries , or which in other ways violated neutral territory , would clearly fall foul of this provision . 

  From the period between the two World Wars , the main surviving agreement on the laws of war is the 1925 Geneva Protocol on Gas and Bacteriological Warfare . 

  The parties to it declare that " the use in war of asphyxiating , poisonous or other gases , and of all analogous liquids , materials or devices , has been justly condemned " , and they " agree to extend this prohibition to the use of bacteriological methods of warfare " . 

  This Protocol has been cited as one ground for asserting the illegality of nuclear weapons , even in the absence of any specific written agreement about the latter . 

  Nuclear weapons might indeed be considered an " analogous device " which , like bacteriological weaponry , is a potentially uncontrollable agent of mass destruction with an unprecedented capability to destroy the physical integrity of the planet and threaten our existence as a species ( Falk , Meyrowitz and Sanderson , 1981 , p. 31 ) . 

  Since the Second World War many laws of war treaties have had important implications so far as nuclear weapons are concerned . 

  The 1948 Genocide Convention prohibits a wide variety of acts committed with intent to destroy a national , ethnic or religious group . 

  This only confirms already-existing customary law ; and inasmuch as it depends on proving an actual intent partially or completely to destroy a particular group , it may be of only limited relevance as a basis for assessing the legality of nuclear possession or use . 

  The four 1949 Geneva Conventions reflect the principle that parties to a conflict should spare the wounded , prisoners of war , and civilians as much as possible from the effect of armed conflict and occupation . 

  Over 150 states are now parties to these conventions -- by far the highest number of states parties to any laws-of-war agreements . 

  The central concern of all four of these 1949 conventions is the protection of victims of war , especially victims who in one way or another find themselves in the hands of the adversary . 

  The conventions say little or nothing about actual combat , and were seen as supplementary to the 1907 Hague Regulations , which remained in force . 

  The 1954 Hague Cultural Property Convention extends protection to movable or immovable property of cultural value , and obliges the parties to avoid actions ( such as placing a military base next to a cathedral ) which are likely to expose cultural property to damage in the event of armed conflict . 

  The 1977 UN Convention on the Prohibition of Military Use of Environmental Modification Techniques prohibits the deliberate manipulation of natural processes as weapons . 

  The techniques prohibited might include deliberate manipulation of earthquakes , tsunamis , changes in weather patterns , and changes in the state of the ionosphere , It may be presumed that under this convention such changes would be unlawful if achieved by use of nuclear weapons , just as they would be if achieved by any other means . 

  The 1977 Geneva Protocol I , on International Armed Conflicts , supplements the four 1949 Geneva Conventions in various important ways -- not least in that it addresses directly two key matters : methods and means of warfare , and the protection of the civilian population against the effects of hostilities . 

  Article 35 echoes the terms of agreements of 1868 and 1907 , as well as breaking some new ground , when it says : 

  1 . 

  In any armed conflict , the right of the Parties to the conflict to choose methods or means of war is not unlimited . 

  2 . 

  It is prohibited to employ weapons , projectiles and material and methods of warfare of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering . 

  3 . 

  It is prohibited to employ methods or means of warfare which are intended , or may be expected , to cause widespread , long-term and severe damage to the natural environment . 

  Many other provisions of 1977 Geneva Protocol I might seem highly relevant to the question of nuclear weapons use , but there is a difficulty . 

  When signing the protocol on 12 December 1977 , both the UK and the USA declared that they did so on the understanding that the rules in the protocol were " not intended to have any effect on and do not regulate or prohibit the use of nuclear weapons " . 

  Moreover , the UK and the USA have not ratified the protocol , mainly because of objections on other matters , and they are not likely to do so in the near future . 

  The UK and the USA are technically correct in indicating that this protocol does not apply to nuclear weapons -- at least to the extent that this has been their clearly declared position throughout the negotiations , and the International Committee of the Red Cross had accepted that the negotiations did not deal with atomic , biological and chemical warfare ( Collier , 1979 , pp . 21-32 ) . 

  But the effect left in the mind by this UK and USA reservation is unfortunate : it suggests , rightly or wrongly , that these nuclear powers are prepared to support the most elaborate codification limiting the use of conventional force , but at the same time want to keep their hands completely free so far as nuclear weapons use is concerned . 

  However , their position is in fact not quite so outrageous , as will be indicated in the next section of this chapter . 

  The tendency to restrict the use of conventional weapons , while apparently leaving the use of nuclear weapons almost untouched , is also evident in the 1981 UN Convention on Specific Conventional Weapons . 

  However , the preamble to this convention reaffirms certain broad humanitarian principles of considerable potential relevance to the nuclear weapons issue , and inter alia it repeats almost word for word the terms of Article 35 of 1977 Geneva Protocol I , already quoted . 

  One general point about the international agreements on the laws of war : they have never been very successful in addressing directly either the general issue of bombing from the air , or the particular issue of the use of nuclear weapons . 

  They have much more to say on less apocalyptic matters , such as the treatment of persons who are in the hands of the adversary . 

  The main attempt to tackle the issue of bombing , the 1923 Hague Rules of Aerial Warfare , is an admirable and detailed interpretation of customary rules and general principles of the laws of war , but it was never adopted by states in legally binding form -- partly because of the belief , widely held in the aftermath of the First World War that the important thing was to prevent war altogether , rather than to devise rules for how it might be conducted . 

  Ironically , a similar belief prevails today , in a slightly different mutation . 

  Today , in the minds of many , the prevention of war through deterrence is more important than the devising of rules for its conduct or limitation . 

  This may help to explain , even if it does not wholly excuse , the extraordinary silence of the laws of war so far as nuclear weapons are concerned . 

  In the forty years since 1945 there have been ten new international agreements on the laws of war , totalling perhaps 100 000 words , yet the words " nuclear weapons " do not occur once in them . 

  This does not mean that nuclear use is permitted under the laws of war , for the fundamental principles regarding such matters as protection of non-combatants remain . 

  Just as within states murder may remain a crime even if not all possible murder weapons are specifically identified in the laws , so between states indiscriminate slaughter may remain a crime even if nuclear weapons are not specifically mentioned in the laws of war . 

  All in all , and despite the failure of the conventions to address the nuclear issue directly , a plausible case can be made that the general principles and fundamental purposes of the conventions are clear enough , and are incompatible with virtually any imaginable use of nuclear weapons in war . 

  This being so , possession of such weapons must also be called in question . 

  It is not surprising that this conclusion has been reached by a number of writers , including Falk et al . 

  ( 1981 ) , Griffith ( 1984 ) , and Delf ( 1985 ) . 

  However , the conclusions of these writers may be open to certain lines of criticism , and some writers who have addressed the question of nuclear weapons and the laws of war have reached conclusions which are significantly different in important respects . 

  Some of their views are mentioned in a later section . 

  OTHER SOURCES OF THE LAWS OF WAR 

  International Custom 

  Since the conventions offer an imperfect guide to the subject at hand , it is necessary to look at some of the other types of sources which are generally recognised as being useful in establishing what the law is , and in relating it to specific situations and technical developments . 

  International custom , which includes the actual practice of states and unilateral declarations made by states , is a source of prime importance , and is by no means barren so far as nuclear questions are concerned . 

  The first and most important consideration is that in the forty years since 9 August 1945 , despite the fact that all the nuclear powers have been involved in wars at one time or another , nuclear weapons have not once been used militarily . 

  This mere fact suggests that there is an extremely strong presumption against their use . 

  The precise reasons why this is so may well be complex , and derive no doubt from considerations of deterrence as well as of legality . 

  But the long period of non-use can be said to amount to a custom , and to create a reasonable expectation that the pattern of restraint should continue in the future ( O'Brien , 1967 , pp . 79-80 ) . 

  A related international custom which appears to have emerged is that the use of nuclear weapons can only be authorised by the highest political authorities in each nuclear state . 

  In the USA , for example , any use of nuclear weapons except under the highest authorisation would be illegal under US domestic law ( Collier , 1979 , p. 10 ) . 

  This underlines the fact that in nuclear matters , as in the laws of war generally , domestic law may be very important both as a source of the law and as providing some sanctions . 

  Further , the authorities in a number of nuclear states have made unilateral statements of one kind or another which indicate that their nuclear weapons may not have escaped entirely from laws-of-war restraints . 

  For example , China in 1964 , and the Soviet Union in 1982 , made unilateral verbal commitments to a policy of " no first use " of nuclear weapons . 

  Inevitably , doubts have been expressed about the credibility of such statements , but they may have some significance nonetheless . 

  For their part , the Western nuclear powers ( USA , UK and France ) have been reluctant to make any " no first use " statements , not least because of their traditional reliance on the threat of possible first use as a means of compensating for their presumed disadvantages in the conventional military balance . 

  However , the USA in particular has over the years been increasingly explicit in accepting certain international legal restraints on possible nuclear use . 

  It is true that the three US military manuals contain chilling statements asserting the legality of nuclear weapons use . 

  The naval manual ( US , Department of the Navy , 1955 , 6-4 ) is clear on this point , but also draws attention in a footnote to the relevance of the principles of the laws of war . 

  The Army Field Manual , The Law of Land Warfare ( US , Department of the Army , 1956 , p. 18 ) is extremely stark : 

  A later air force manual ( US , Department of the Air Force , 1976 , 6-5 ) is at least slightly more nuanced than this : 

  This US air force manual goes on to list six arms control agreements . 

  The three US service manuals are currently in process of being updated , and it will be interesting to see whether either they , or the new UK tri-service manual which is now in an advanced state of preparation , say anything more specific about possible limits of one kind or another to the use of nuclear weapons . 

  Apart from the military manuals , a number of other US statements have suggested a certain influence of laws of war considerations . 

  The US Delegation to the UN General Assembly indicated on 10 December 1968 ( Collier , 1979 , pp . 19-20 ) that the following principles are statements of international law : 

  1 . 

  There is a limit to the permissible means of injuring the enemy , a limit which is inevitably affected by the actions of all parties to any conflict . 

  2 . 

  Civilian populations may not be attacked as such , but we recognise that the co-location of military targets and civilians may make unavoidable certain injury to civilians . 

  Moreover , we should recognise soberly that none of these principles offers any significant protection to civilians , in the catastrophic event of nuclear war . 

  3 . 

  There are indeed principles of law relative to the use of weapons in warfare , and these principles apply as well to the use of nuclear and similar weapons . 

  Despite such statements , the USA continued to reply on a nuclear strategic approach which was and remains questionable on various grounds , including laws of war . 

  The first particular strategy which has been subject to criticism has been the reliance on possible first use of nuclear weapons as a means of countering presumed superior Soviet conventional power -- a reliance which McNamara sought for a while to abandon when Secretary of Defense in the early 1960s , and which he openly challenged in a famous recent article ( Bundy et al . , 

  1982 ) . 

  The second particular strategy which has been subject to criticism has been the targeting of cities and other locations not of a strictly military character . 

  Many writers viewed this strategy as doubtful or worse so far as the laws of war were concerned ( Builder and Graubard , 1982 ) . 

  The Reagan Administration has shown some willingness significantly to qualify these dismal and heavily criticised strategic ideas . 

  President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative , announced in 1983 , has always been accompanied by a strong element of criticism of existing US nuclear policy , but it may turn out to be a good deal less than the promised means of freeing the world from the scourge of nuclear weaponry . 

  Of great significance may be certain statements made by Secretary of Defense Weinberger in his annual report to Congress ( United States , Secretary of Defense , 1983 , pp . 55-7 ) : 

  The report goes on to repudiate the whole idea of a " no first use " pledge , which might enable " the Soviets " to " gain a unilateral conventional advantage " , would be " unenforceable and unverifiable " , and could " increase the chances of war and thus increase the chances of nuclear conflict " . 

  But it does add : " The very purpose of our effort to strengthen conventional forces is to prevent a situation in which it would become necessary to use nuclear weapons to stop a conventional attack " . 

  Apart from the USA , the other nuclear states have issued pronouncements of one kind or another indicating certain restraints on deployment or possible use . 

  It is noteworthy , however , that both the British and French governments , with their much smaller nuclear forces , have apparently stuck to a declaratory policy of targeting Soviet cities , and have not made statements repudiating purely anti-population strategy in any way comparable with the 1983 US statement quoted . 

  Court Decisions 

  Because the laws of war derive to a large extent from standards which have developed within states , and because they have always depended for their enforcement largely on national legal systems , court decisions have been a very important source of the laws of war . 

  However , there have been rather few cases which have addressed at all directly the question of the legality of the use of nuclear weapons , and even fewer judgments touching on this . 

  For reasons which are well known , after the Section World War the International Military Tribunals at Nuremberg and Tokyo did not directly address the question of air warfare . 

  This led the Indian judge in the Tokyo tribunal to issue a detailed and lengthy dissenting judgment , in which he asserted that the US atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki was itself a war crime ( Pal , 1953 ) . 

  The one case in which the legality of nuclear weapons use has been pronounced upon directly is the Shimoda Case in Japan , in which judgment was given on 7 December 1963 . 

  In 1955 five Japanese citizens started a legal action against their own government to recover damages for injuries they had sustained as a result of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 

  They argued that the use of atomic weapons violated both conventional and customary international law . 

  The Court dismissed these claims on the ground that the right of individuals to become claimants in international law is recognised only when approved by specific treaty , and that in the Peace Treaty Japan had waived all claims of Japan or its nationals arising out of the war . 

  However , the Court did conclude that the dropping of the atomic bombs on Japan had been in violation of international law . 

  The question addressed in the judgment was not whether the use of atomic weapons generally was forbidden , but rather whether the particular bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were illegal under international law at that time ( Collier , 1979 , pp . 6-7 ; Falk et al . , 

  1981 , pp . 53-7 ) . 

  The judgment stated : 

  The Japanese judgment is by no means immune to criticism . 

  It is based at least in part on a historical view that the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki may have been militarily unnecessary -- a view which is strongly contested by some but by no means all historians who have looked at the matter . 

  There is in fact a good deal of documentary evidence that the atomic bombings were not merely followed by the Japanese surrender on 14 August 1945 , but actually led to it ( Giovannitti and Freed , 1967 ) . 

  But whatever criticisms might be directed at the Japanese judgment , it remains important as the one case in which a court has ruled on the legality of actual use of nuclear weapons . 

  In a number of other court cases , attempts have been made to raise issues relating to the legality of the use and possession of nuclear weapons , but usually without success . 

  National courts are notoriously reluctant to be dragged into judgments about the legality or otherwise of the security policies pursued by their governments . 

  Thus in the case of Greenham Women Against Cruise Missiles v. 

  Ronald Reagan et al . , 

  at the US District Court for the Southern District of New York , the judge in his decision on 1 August 1984 dismissed the lawsuit brought by British women opposed to deployment of American cruise missiles at Greenham Common air base in England . 

  In his twenty-one-page judgment he said that the court lacked the resources and expertise to resolve the issue of whether the missiles created a risk of nuclear war between the USA and the USSR . 

  He said : " The courts are simply incapable of determining the effect of the missile deployment on world peace " . 

  On 8 February 1985 a federal appeal court in New York upheld this judgment , stating that the decision to deploy these weapons was the responsibility of Congress and the executive branch of government . 

  ( For further discussion of this and other court cases , see Part III of this volume . ) 

  Opinions of Writers 

  Distinguished specialists in international law have reached a number of quite different conclusions about the legality of the use and possession of nuclear weapons . 

  They do agree , as a minimum , that there is a strong presumption against the use of nuclear weapons ; and that nuclear weapons must be subject , at the very minimum , to certain basic laws of war rules on such matters as not targeting the civilian populations as such . 

  But beyond those modest crumbs of comfort there is disagreement . 

  A very early book touching on the subject , the third edition of Air Power and War Rights ( Spaight , 1947 , pp . 274-6 ) drew attention to the specific characteristics of the atomic bomb which made its use questionable -- namely the scale of devastation , and the after-effects of exposure to atomic radiation . 

  Spaight questioned the facile view that the bombings of Japan were justified because they saved lives in the end , and he indicated that atomic bombs , if they have the after-effects reported , " are condemned by inference or analogy if not specifically " . 

  He did not go into further detail about the morality or legality of nuclear use or nuclear deterrence , partly no doubt because he favoured an effective world-wide prohibition on nuclear weapons production ( Spaight , 1947 , p. 218 ) and therefore hoped that such issues would not arise . 

  With forty years of hindsight , we know that such hopes for a ban on possession of the bomb were sadly misplaced . 

  Georg Schwafenberger's book The Legality of Nuclear Weapons ( 1958 , pp . 47-9 ) reached conclusions which came to terms more with the by then widespread possession of nuclear weapons . 

  He said that considerations of humanity are no substitute for prohibitive rules of international law and , by themselves , do not constitute evidence of rules prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons . 

  Further , he suggested that the principle of the exemption of the civilian population from being an intentional object of warfare had been so whittled down during the Second World War and in post-1945 treaties as to cease to offer reliable guidance except in the most unambiguous circumstances . 

  He did accept that the effects of radiation and fall-out could make applicable the rules against poisoned weapons , gases and analogous materials . 

  However : 

  Nagendra Singh , in his book Nuclear Weapons and International Law ( Singh , 1959 , p. 215 ) advanced the view , subsequently taken up by many other legal writers , that the first use of nuclear weapons would be particularly questionable in international law : 

  A number of American " just war " theorists , who see the law of war as one part of the " just war " tradition , have favoured a policy of no-first-use of nuclear weapons , and no counter-city warfare . 

  They have also pointed to the need to replace reliance on nuclear weapons to the maximum extent practicable . 

  But they have not ruled out all imaginable uses of nuclear weapons ( O'Brien , 1967 , p. 87 ; Johnson , 1984 , pp . 80-2 and 148 ) . 

  To the extent that such approaches may suggest the desirability of changing over to a counter-force nuclear policy , they escape from the moral frying-pan of counter-city targeting into the strategic fire of counter-force , which has the twin disadvantages that it might put a premium on first strike and that it would in any case result in frightful civilian losses . 

  Johnson ( 1984 , p. 142 ) recognises this problem . 

  Ian Brownlie ( 1963 , pp . 262-4 ) expresses considerable doubt about the lawfulness of the use of nuclear weapons against an attack by conventional weapons . 

  However , he concedes that " state practice on this question is not unequivocal but indicates that the governments of the United States , France , Canada , and the United Kingdom regard the use of nuclear weapons as permissible against an aggressor state irrespective of the weapons employed by the latter " . 

  Bert Rling , the Dutch international lawyer who died in early 1985 , having been the last surviving judge from the International Military Tribunal for the Far East at Tokyo , addressed the nuclear weapons issue as much in terms of purported prudential policy-making as in terms of legal principle . 

  He said in a lecture : 

  In contrast to Rling's approach , which in the above quotation is essentially similar to that of the policy-maker , those international lawyers who have stressed the illegality of nuclear weapons ( for example , Falk et al . , 

  1981 ) have done so largely on the basis of comparing the known terrible effects of nuclear weapons with the key underlying principles of the laws of war . 

  Different modes of analysis , it seems , produce different results . 

  It is as if strict legal considerations seem to pull in one direction , while supposedly practical policy considerations point in another . 

  Those international lawyers , such as Brownlie , who are sceptical about the legality of nuclear weapons use , but who at the same time take a practical view of the law and see it as closely related to what states actually do , are in something of a bind , as they do not hesitate to acknowledge . 

  There are many other types of source , besides those considered here , which in one way or another address the issue of the legality of nuclear weapons . 

  Many UN General Assembly resolutions have called into question the legality of the first use , or indeed all use , of nuclear weapons ( Schindler and Toman , 1981 , pp . 121 and 129 ) . 

  However , these resolutions , important as they are , reflect some of the problems already detected in other sources . 

  For example , as Kalshoven has pointed out ( Kalshoven , 1971 , p. 345 ) , General Assembly Resolution 1653 ( XVI ) of 24 November 1961 in one breath declares the use of nuclear weapons to be unlawful , and requests the Secretary-General to consult governments with a view to a possible convention on the prohibition of the use of such weapons . 

  There does not appear to have been any significant progress on this in the intervening twenty-four years . 

  WHY HAVE THE LAWS OF WAR NOT ADDRESSED NUCLEAR ISSUES BETTER ? 

  The evidence of uncertainty and equivocation in the way in which the laws of war have , or have not , been applied to the problem of nuclear weapons is plain enough . 

  The record is by no means all negative , and many restrictions placed on the use of nuclear weapons are of considerable importance . 

  However , it can not be said that the laws-of-war approach has resulted in clear and unambiguous agreement either among writers or among countries as to the precise restrictions to be placed on nuclear weapons use . 

  Nor can there be any claim that the laws-of-war approach has been at all decisive anywhere in illuminating the issue of the legality or otherwise of possession of such weapons . 

  How has this failure come about ? 

  In part , perhaps , because of the great energy and attention directed to the question of nuclear arms control and disarmament . 

  It was a natural response to the advent of nuclear weapons to concentrate on means of limiting or even abolishing them ; and this response has led to a long series of arms control and disarmament negotiations at Geneva and elsewhere . 

  However , these negotiations , important as they are , have led to only modest results . 

  They should not entirely supplant from political discourse and practical consideration the separate question of restrictions on the use ( as distinct from possession ) of nuclear weapons . 

  Another reason for the failure may be that law , including international law , is sometimes better at regulating small problems than large ones . 

  Just as within a state the law may be more effective in responding to armed robbery than it is at responding to a military coup d'tat , so in relations between states the law may be better at laying down detailed provisions for the treatment of prisoners of war than it is at addressing the potential human catastrophe of a nuclear war . 

  A related reason for the failure is that in this century , as far as armed combat is concerned , the record of the laws of war has been distinctly uneven . 

  Such practices in the Second World War as the bombing of cities , the sinking of merchant vessels , and the invasion of neutral states , all cast doubt on the adequacy and effectiveness of the laws-of-war approach . 

  The lectures edited by Michael Howard ( 1979 ) and Geoffrey Best's fine history of the laws of war ( Best , 1980 ) both trace the sad decline of the laws of war in the heat of total war . 

  Those parts of the laws of war which retained the greatest importance and practical relevance were the parts relating to the protection of individuals in the adversary's hands : prisoners of war , civilians in occupied territory , and so on . 

  A more fundamental reason for failure is the deep commitment of the governments of the nuclear powers to the idea of nuclear deterrence . 

  All these powers have had experience in living memory of the inadequacy of paper promises , and the extreme costs of all-out conventional war . 

  In their various ways , and with the help of nuclear weapons , all are insuring against a repetition of past disasters . 

  They are putting almost all their eggs in the basket of deterrence , particularly nuclear deterrence . 

  Their aim is not so much to alleviate the horrors of war as to make war so horrific that potential aggressors will fear to resort to it at all . 

  This is most clearly the case with NATO policy , which relies on possible first use of nuclear weapons and thus opposes one of the most obvious candidates for a laws-of-war rule on nuclear weaponry -- namely , no first use . 

  There is an obvious tension between a laws-of-war approach seeking to minimise the horrors of war if it occurs , and a deterrence approach seeking to prevent war altogether by making it frightful . 

  There is little doubt , moreover , that in the nuclear age the deterrence mode of thinking has by and large been the intellectually prevalent one . 

  Deterrence has developed a language , a range of scholarship , and a political influence considerably in advance of anything achieved in the name of the laws of war . 

  Moreover , there has sometimes been reason to doubt the relevance of laws-of-war thinking to the important objective of strategic stability in relations between the nuclear powers . 

  As already indicated , laws-of-war considerations may lead writers or policy-makers to advocate targeting missile bases rather than cities -- but this might prove in practice an open invitation to compete in nuclear hardware or , even worse , an incentive to strike first . 

  Similarly , laws-of-war considerations might lead to advocacy of a very large nuclear armoury , on the grounds that only then can weapons be used discriminately -- but this could only too easily be read as a threat by the adversary . 

  Alternatively , laws-of-war considerations can lead to advocacy of the enhanced radiation weapon or neutron bomb , on the grounds that it is aimed specifically to destroy military targets ( Johnson , 1984 , pp . 46-7 ) -- but this could lead to pressure for first use of nuclear weapons . 

  One is even tempted to propound a theorem to cope with the bewildering thickets of paradox obstructing every path , namely : every attempt to ameliorate nuclear doctrine in one respect produces an equal and opposite effect in some other respect . 

  The apparent ascendancy of nuclear-deterrence thinking over laws-of-war thinking has been so complete that the idea of deterrence has come to be associated in the public mind almost exclusively with extreme offensive threats against the adversary's society . 

  The idea of deterrence by denial , of making one's own society hard to conquer , has a good historical record but has received far less attention . 

  There is one particularly notable exception to the proposition that the laws of war proved inadequate in limiting combat in the Second World War -- the 1925 Geneva Protocol . 

  The prohibition embodied in this agreement , relating to the use of gas and other weapons , has been the single most effective prohibition of a class of weapon in the laws of war . 

  It is purely a prohibition on use -- not on possession -- and in view of the reservations made by states parties it can be viewed as little more than a " no first use " pact . 

  Since 1925 , it is true , gas has been used in some conflicts , including most recently in the Iran-Iraq war . 

  However , it was not used in the Second World War , nor in many other wars . 

  Why has this prohibition in the 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol been relatively well observed ? 

  Most people who have looked at the matter have concluded that deterrence played at least some part in the process . 

  However unsatisfactory the ancient idea of belligerent reprisals may be , the threat of reprisals does appear to have been effective in this matter ( Kalshoven , 1971 , p. 348 ) . 

  If that view is correct , as I take it to be , then the non-use of gas is one area in which the laws-of-war approach on the one hand , and the deterrence approach on the other , may have complemented each other . 

  This raises the question , discussed in the final section , as to whether there may be other respects in which the laws of war might actually be compatible with deterrence in some form . 

  ARE THE LAWS OF WAR STILL RELEVANT IN THE NUCLEAR AGE ? 

  Even if one takes a sceptical view of the applicability of the laws of war to nuclear weapons , it does not follow that the laws of war are irrelevant in the nuclear age . 

  This is partly because what might be called laws-of-war issues -- to do with legitimacy in the use of force , proportionality , restraint and so on -- invariably lurk in the shadows of all discussions about nuclear weaponry , and would inevitably return to haunt those who cavalierly denied the importance of such issues . 

  It is also because nuclear weapons have not completely transformed the military and moral environment in which we live . 

  There is no sign that nuclear deterrence can prevent all conflicts . 

  There are still conventional armed conflicts , military occupations , counter-insurgency campaigns , naval encounters , captures of prisoners , and all the other manifestations of warfare ancient and modern . 

  In other words , the very things that led to the development of the laws of war in the first place are still with us . 

  Moreover , the risk that conventional conflicts may get out of hand and degenerate into nuclear disaster is one with which mankind will have to live for ever , and it strengthens the argument for attempting to keep conflicts within some kinds of bounds . 

  The laws of war may provide one possible means ( though not the only one ) of achieving this difficult object . 

  The increasing accuracy of weapons -- even those delivered by aircraft and rocket -- may reopen some possibilities for discrimination in targeting that seemed to be closed in the air operations of the two World Wars . 

  It may even be that the indiscriminacy of some of the air operations in the Second World War will come to be seen as something of a historical aberration , and a mere temporary consequence of the undeveloped state of the arts of target acquisition and guidance . 

  The laws of war may have one other function in the contemporary era -- helping to harmonise standards between allies . 

  The adoption of different standards by allies in key matters such as the treatment of neutral shipping , or prisoners , can cause serious problems . 

  The laws of war may be one means of bringing about harmonisation : the very first multilateral laws-of-war convention of the modern type , namely the 1856 Paris Declaration on Maritime Warfare , was concluded because there had been divergent practices among the allies involved in the Crimean War . 

  In the nuclear age , peace-time alliances seem a permanent fact . 

  Yet NATO has made only modest efforts to formulate a common approach to laws of war matters , for example , in the negotiations leading to the 1977 Geneva Protocol I . 

  There is a strong case for a more serious effort at collaboration on such matters within the alliance . 

  POSSIBLE FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN THE LAWS OF WAR 

  Could the laws of war be further developed to address the nuclear weapons question more directly and explicitly ? 

  Forty years of extremely limited progress in the sphere suggest that optimism would be out of place . 

  There may even be some good reasons for keeping out of this no-man's-land . 

  Among some people who have been involved in negotiations at Geneva on laws-of-war matters there is a genuine concern that any neat set of rules limiting the use of nuclear weapons in one way or another might have the unfortunate effects either of weakening deterrence ; or else , contrariwise , of seeming to legitimise such uses of nuclear weapons as are not covered in any agreement ; or else of being nothing more than a paper accord , which would be of little real value in a conflict . 

  The implicit assumption here is that it may be best to leave nuclear weapons in a partial legal limbo , with an extremely strong presumption against the legality of their use , but with no formal and explicit rules turning this presumption into treaty language and adding detail to it . 

  On the other hand , there are powerful arguments for tackling the problem . 

  First , the nuclear states have got away too easily with only very limited restrictions on the vast destructive power in their hands , and with declaratory strategic doctrines which would be genocidal in their effect if implemented . 

  Second , in the NATO member states , the relative lack of formal restrictions has contributed to the public unease about defence policy , which is associated in people's minds with threats of all-out nuclear war : far from assisting deterrence this situation is highly corrosive so far as effective defence and deterrence are concerned . 

  For these and other reasons , it can not be taken as axiomatic that the most extreme threats are the most effective . 

  Third , in the event of there ever being a major conflict which risks escalating to the nuclear level , rules and associated practices and deployments which are specifically aimed at reducing the risks of escalation could play a valuable role . 

  Fourth , with the likely acquisition of nuclear weapons by at least some additional states in the next few decades , the need for some clear rules of the road so far as nuclear weapons are concerned may actually increase . 

  And fifth , the distinctly limited success of negotiations on arms control and disarmament reinforces the case for examining a quite distinct approach , dealing with restrictions on use . 

  It is not self-evident that all clarifications or developments of the laws of war have to take the familiar form of multilateral conventions . 

  In some cases , depending on the type of issue addressed , formal statements by governments , whether in public speeches , reports or military manuals , are at least as valuable or even more so . 

  On certain issues , such diplomatic forms as UN General Assembly resolutions may be more appropriate . 

  The issues which will inevitably come up in one form or another include " no first use " of nuclear weapons , about which a good deal has been written , not least in No-First-Use ( Blackaby et al . , 

  1984 ) and which is discussed by Goldblat in this volume . 

  Whether or not the NATO powers are able to subscribe to a formal doctrine of " no first use " , there is little doubt that they urgently need to get away from their present highly questionable doctrine of heavy reliance on first use . 

  Limitations on missions and targeting , including commitments not to use weapons above a certain yield , or not to use nuclear weapons against centres of population , or in certain geographical areas , may also have an increasing part to play ( Collier , 1979 , p. 41 ) . 

  This leads inevitably into the complex , ambiguous , but probably unavoidable subject of policies , rules and deployments which might help to limit any nuclear war should it occur ( Clarke , 1982 ) . 

  As Laurence Martin has said : " It is impossible to refute entirely the criticism that the various strategies of limitation may appear to make the world safe for nuclear warfare and thereby hasten its onset " ; but he concluded : " The proper question may therefore be not , should we contemplate limited nuclear war , but , should we consider the ways of limiting the nuclear war which is henceforth always a possibility " ( Howard , 1979 , pp . 119 and 120 ) . 

  Above all , the extremely strong presumption against the legality of the use of nuclear weapons needs not only to be reaffirmed , but also made more specific . 

  Nuclear weapons can not escape from the kinds of restraints built up carefully in the laws-of-war tradition over the centuries , but there is a risk that they may be thought to be so escaping ( especially in view of the UK and US reservations to 1977 Geneva Protocol I ) unless positive action in this direction is taken , The comparative neglect of the whole subject of laws-of-war restrictions on the use of nuclear weapons has endured for forty years , for reasons which can be understood if not approved . 

  It is high time for this neglect to yield to a more open discussion of these issues and a more positive approach . 

  Legality , Morality and the Nuclear State 

  Grasping the Legal Nettle : Towards an Understanding of Law and Peace 

  JOHN DEWAR and MATTHIAS RUETE 

  INTRODUCTION 

  Anti-nuclear campaigners are convinced of the justice of their cause . 

  This easily translates into the notion that law is , or ought to be , on their side ; yet like other popular movements , the peace movement has found itself involved with " the law " in a complex variety of ways , both passively and actively . 

  Law has been one , though not the exclusive , point of interaction between the pro-nuclear state forces and the anti-nuclear peace movement . 

  On the one hand , law is one means by which the political system wields its power against the peace movement , by prosecuting , fining or imprisoning individual protestors , by altering bye-laws or by controlling the very right to protest . 

  On the other hand , legal strategies have been employed by the peace movement to challenge the authority of state agencies , whether by setting up Nuclear Free Zones , challenging the sale of National Trust land to the Ministry of Defence , or the siting of a shooting range in Berlin ( Guelen , 1985 ) 1 and suing the President of the United States of America for breaches of International Law.2 In other contexts , law has provided a forum in which the rights of individuals in the peace movement and the demands of the state have been adjudicated , for example in deciding on the validity of withholding tax contributions for military spending . 

  These examples of how the law may be used both by and against the peace movement point to the ambiguous and contradictory nature of the law itself , and the relationship between law and the peace movement generally . 

  Given this ambiguity , is there any way of " thinking about law " which can further our understanding of this relationship and so guide law's potential contribution to political movements in general , and the peace movement in particular ? 

  We believe that there is , but that it has to be recognised that no single model of " what law is " and how it relates to " justice " can provide any instant prescription for the tactics to be adopted . 

  This ought not to be surprising given the diversity of law itself and the increasingly diverse ways in which legal systems are developing . 

  A legal system is not a monolith , but is made up of a variety of legal " arenas " in which many different " legal languages " are spoken , and while some of these arenas may well be prepared to listen to the presentation of a problem in one jurisprudential language , others might reject it completely ( Ladeur , 1984 ; Sciolla , 1983 ; Dunsire , 1978 ) . 

  A good example is the " right " to tax diversion ( see Dignan , Chapter 6 ) -- while British Courts are prepared to listen to arguments based on statutory rights , and may well be prepared to listen to arguments grounded in International Law , they are far less willing , at present , to accept arguments based on concepts of ( natural ) rights . 

  However , such arguments will be more successful in a hearing before the European Commission on Human Rights ( and not only because of the European Convention ) , and may provoke even greater interest amongst academic lawyers attempting to overcome the limitations of the dominant positivist approach to legal problems , and amongst the wider non-legal public . 

  Thus , we would caution against drawing general conclusions from analyses of specific areas of law , and we would argue that it is important to develop , not a theory of law , but a theory of the role of law in society to enable a clearer assessment of the extent or limits of law's importance . 

  In other words , we would argue for the need to place a perspective on the potential contribution of law and lawyers to the peace movement . 

  We will develop this further at a later stage . 

  For the moment , we would point out that traditional theories of law , such as positivism , are characterised by a lack of concern for such perspectives , tending to regard law as both a static and isolated social phenomenon ; and insofar as they consider political struggle at all , they regard it as merely a struggle for the control of law as an " instrument " . 

  Our point is that a popular movement such as the peace movement carries within itself a notion of a just society and that law can not be considered merely as a " tool " isolated from broader political and social considerations . 

  Once we have discussed some of the different ways of thinking about law which are raised by the contributions in this section , we will try to place these within a wider framework and so work towards an assessment of the potential role of law and lawyers within the peace movement . 

  " NUCLEAR WAR CA N'T BE RIGHT' 

  When confronted with the prospect of a nuclear holocaust , peace campaigners sometimes search for a legal expression for their moral outrage , and some layers are indeed able to offer such legal comfort . 

  For some centuries , natural law theories have provided political and social groups , as well as individuals , with justifications for their actions ( Bloch , 1961 ) but for even longer they have also contributed to an understanding and legitimation of institutions such as the church , the monarchy and the state . 

  It is possible to distinguish two phases in the development of natural law , the earlier phase based on religion and the more recent secular phase . 

  Although the now frequently-used concept of " the right to resistance " was referred to in the older religion-based natural law theories , it is mainly the more recent , secularised version of natural law with its emphasis on human rights that seems to provide a theoretical underpinning for some of the assertions about the illegality of nuclear war and the justifiability of nuclear protest . 

  In crude terms , one could describe the essence of natural law approaches to be the view that the validity of positive law rests ultimately on its conformity with some " higher law " , whatever the source of the latter . 

  Some modern variants are sociologically based , asserting that certain fundamental values are empirically found to exist in similar societies ( Rawls , 1972 ; Sparer , 1984 ; Moore , 1978 ) ; other variants are more speculative and derive their value-systems from a moral , ethical or other ideological source ( Finnis , 1980 ) . 

  The " higher law " may also be formulated as a temporal limit -- should the present generation have the power to bind , or even dispose of , future generations , or do these future generations have a fundamental right to live and structure their own lives ? 

  ( Jonas , 1979 ; Preuss , 1984 ; Hubin , 1976 ) . 

  Thus we can see that there is a broad variety of approaches which we may group under the heading of " natural law theories " because they all rely on something other than state law to constitute the valid rules of a legal system . 

  In the UK , theories openly based on natural law have exerted little influence , at least since the nineteenth century . 

  Equally , there has been no need or opportunity to discuss concepts of rights in detail , since there are no entrenched constitutional provisions to serve as an automatic focus of attention . 

  Ronald Dworkin , in his book , Taking Rights Seriously ( Dworkin , 1978 ) , is one of the academic authors who has recently reintroduced a perspective reflecting these approaches into British legal theory through his argument that the fragmented process of legislation , adjudication and administration can at least be checked if not comprehended when measured against rights , rights which derive ultimately from the master principle of equal concern and respect . 

  This is Dignan's starting-point in his discussion in Chapter 6 of the legal problems of tax diversion . 

  Such a theory is based ( as Dignan shows ) on a vision of state and society as separate entities , with protection of individual liberties from state encroachment dependent on individual legal rights . 

  It is interesting that in the latter half of the twentieth century , this perspective can find such resonance . 

  The reason may lie in precisely those factors that make the theory outdated -- the disappearance of the separate spheres of state and society , a separation on which liberal theory is based . 

  It is the replacement of this differentiation of state and society by a more complex web of interrelated systems which has led many lawyers to seek alternatives to positivist approaches which in many cases rely on the liberal model of parliamentary democracy as their underlying assumption . 

  The attractions of Dworkin's thesis can possibly be explained by this need for a new unitary formulation of legal theory -- the irony , of course , is that Dworkin shares with other approaches this simplified view of today's society . 

  Dignan points to increasing state intervention and changing forms of law , and emphasises that these developments can no longer be understood by reference to traditional theory . 

  He thus diagnoses a crisis of legal ideology and democratic theory . 

  It is our contention that at least one of the functions of legal and political theory should be to assist in structuring a wealth of material as a means of revealing general principles behind the abundance of individual facts . 

  This process of the reduction of complexity on a theoretical level is only acceptable if the theoretical perception somehow reflects reality -- the question , therefore , is whether a rights-based theory can help us to understand the complexities of twentieth-century law and government . 

  Dignan's answer is that it can , provided that the theoretical basis of Dworkin's ideas is revised and that the master principle , which is the grundnorm of all rights-based arguments , is reformulated in a progressive way . 

  Two questions , however , may be asked . 

  First , is it not the case that the whole idea of a right is inextricably linked with the liberal ( or , as Dignan calls it , gesellschaft ) model of society ? 

  How far can we continue to speak in terms of the sphere of society as being clearly separate from the sphere of the state ? 

  In other words , how far can the distinction between " public " and " private " be said to continue as a valid principle in which to base the notion of individual rights ? 

  ( Harlow , 1980 ; Horwitz , 1982 ; Kennedy , 1982 ; Benn and Gaus , 1983 ) . 

  If we conclude that state intervention has eroded the theoretical basis of individual rights in certain sectors of society , are other sectors discernible where propositions concerning individual rights might still be valid ? 

  This in turn raises a series of further issues about rights of crucial importance to the peace movement . 

  For example , can there be collective rights , or are rights necessarily individual ? 

  If such rights depend for their enforcement on existing legal processes , how effective can they be ? 

  For example , constitutional or statutory rights for blacks or women , such as anti-discrimination or equal pay , have not in themselves done much to change the social situation of those groups ( Lustgarten , 1980 ) . 

  It could be said that the existence of a legal right has provided a focus for political organisation -- but does such a focus strengthen the movement or weaken it , for example , by diverting resources to legal rather than other struggles ? ( cf . the debates on " legislation " , Teubner , 1985 ) . 

  Vogler argues that these are very real dangers ( although in his view they can and must be overcome ) . 

  Would the peace movement , then , be strengthened by formulating some of its demands as legal rights ? 

  Such a strategy presents dangers arising from the very abstract character of rights as , for example , the Trade Union movement has discovered when employment rights , which strengthen the position of employees , also weaken Trade Unions by undermining collective organisation ( Mellish and Collis-Squires , 1976 ; Henry , 1982 ) . 

  A second question is whether the " rights " approach does not essentially depend on a non-controversial ( that is , abstract and apolitical ) formulation of the master principle ? 

  Dignan's attempt to reformulate it in a " progressive " way could therefore be seen as partisan , and therefore necessarily outside the ambit of a " rights " approach . 

  As Bruce Kent's contribution ( in Chapter 8 of this volume ) suggests , however , this does not mean that we have to reject all approaches based on a rights theory , or even on natural law . 

  However , we should be conscious of the assumptions underlying these theories which , more often than not , despite the apparently general formulations , are valid and useful only within a specific framework . 

  Taking generalised formulations of legal theory seriously can often lead into the cul-de-sac of the unspoken assumption of that theory . 

  Although sympathetic to a progressive rights theory , Dignan attempts to avoid this problem by examining in some breadth and detail the validity of the assumptions made by Dworkin concerning modern liberal political systems , and argues that Dworkin's assumptions may help provide the peace movement with a legal theory . 

  However , Dworkin's argument depends on a master principle which is seen as " uncontroversial " , and whether Dignan's reformulation would be acceptable may be a matter of debate . 

  Another aspect of rights is discussed in the debate concerning the compatibility or otherwise of " rights " with socialism ( Campbell , 1983 , 1985 ; Simmonds , 1985 ) . 

  The relevance of this debate for present purposes is that much of it focuses on two competing ways of characterising rights which in turn have competing implications for a political movement such as the peace movement wishing to formulate its claims in the language of rights . 

  On the one hand there is the " will theory " , which regards the distinctive feature of a right as lying in the fact that it offers a " legally protected choice " ( Hart , 1973 ) , giving the right-holder the power to exact compliance , or not . 

  On the other hand , there is the " interest theory " which regards rights as protecting some personal interest of the right-holder without necessarily offering a means of enforcement . 

  The point here is that given the institutional and political realities of the formulation and implementation of nuclear policy , it would be difficult to characterise any rights to which the peace movement may wish to lay claim ( for example , the right to a nuclear-free world ) as legally protected " choices " , especially given the insistence by some governments that nuclear policy is not a " justiciable " issue ( Weiss , Chapter 11 ; but see Offczors and Ruete , Chapter 13 ; Hickman , Chapter 12 , all in this volume ) . 

  Any such claim would therefore have to be framed in terms of the interest theory ; yet , as even the advocates of such an approach admit ( Campbell , 1985 , p. 20 ) this involves open-ended and controversial issues as to which interests deserve protection , and some have argued that it leads to a disintegration of any distinctive or effective notion of a right ( Simmonds , 1985 ) . 

  Ultimately , it depends on one's view of the potential of law to achieve social and political transformation . 

  In Chapter 5 of this volume , Campbell expresses his faith ( albeit limited ) in such a possibility . 

  For reasons given in the next section , we remain sympathetically sceptical . 

  Despite these problems , natural law and rights-based theories undoubtedly have something to contribute to an understanding and development of law in a broader social perspective . 

  In particular , by stressing that law must itself contain an element of substantive justice , and that its validity can not be purely formal , such theories clearly show that law can not be isolated from its context . 

  INTERNATIONAL LAW : REALITY OR SYMBOL ? 

  The peace movement can not ignore international law , not merely because many existing provisions tend to provide legal support for the claim that the use of nuclear weapons would be illegal , but also because , in theory at least , it provides the means by which states can bind themselves to restrict the manufacture , storage and use of such weapons ( non-proliferation treaties and regional nuclear-free zones are examples of this ) . 

  No-one can accuse lawyers within the peace movement of failing to seize these opportunities , and yet despite all the energy directed towards establishing that the use -- or even possession -- of nuclear weapons would be illegal , and drafting treaties and campaigning for their adoption by states , few lawyers have attempted to establish the assumptions on the basis of which this activity takes place . 

  One may detect a range of these . 

  First , there is the assumption that , provided international law can be made " effective " in the sense that governments will abide by its provisions , then it will be sufficient for the peace movement merely to seek " enforcement " of those provisions conducive to its aims , and to campaign for the extension of those provisions . 

  In other words , implicit in this assumption is the view that law does restrain or is potentially capable of restraining , the international use of nuclear force . 

  This assumption is not theoretically neutral and arguably derives from a traditional positivist view of law which defines law or legal systems in terms of their effectiveness in establishing ordered behaviour . 

  Thus for Austin and Kelsen , for example , a legal duty depends on the ability of the state to wield a monopoly of force in the event of its violation , whether what is being transgressed is a " command " or a " norm " ( Austin , 1861 ; Kelsen , 1967 ) . 

  For Hart , the existence of law and legal systems depends on a generally observable pattern of social and institutional behaviour in which " rules " are generally effective ( Hart , 1961 ) . 

  Thus , if we operate on traditional assumptions about the nature of law we are left with a political strategy in relation to international law which assumes either that law is effective ( by definition ) or that it is potentially effective ( so that while it may not deserve the name " law " it is at least potentially deserving of that description ) . 

  In other words , legal strategies and arguments assume a central importance . 

  Campbell's contribution in this book , by arguing the case for an " ethical positivism " , is based on a variation of this traditional assumption . 

  Thus for Campbell the effectiveness of law as a means of controlling international nuclear force would be enhanced by the introduction at an international level of the type of legal process found in municipal legal systems , such as legislatures , courts , enforcement and monitoring agencies . 

  This would enhance the authority of international law because of the inherent and self-evidently moral qualities of such an impartial legal process ; the " bindingness " of international law would be increased because the aims of the enterprise -- the peaceful resolution of international conflicts -- would be assumed to be universally desirable . 

  Thus both the nature and function of legal process would enhance international law's claim to authority . 

  Campbell's argument would imply a strategy for the peace movement that is heavily law-based , or at least centred on legal institutions . 

  We may regard it as sharing with positivism the view that the significant features of a legal system ( that is , its aims and components ) can be adequately understood without reference to the political or economic realities in which the legal systems operates . 

  Thus the question of whether a legal duty exists is for a positivist a relatively simple matter of examining the relevant commands , norms or rules of a legal system and does not involve a consideration of , for example , what this duty really means in political , economic or social terms . 

  Similarly , we may argue that Campbell's political strategy is founded in a view of the realities of international relations between states which does not , for example , reflect the fact that the usual benefits of legal process are not immediately obvious to individual states , particularly where nuclear weapons are concerned . 

  Campbell's argument is perhaps best regarded , therefore , as a " morality of aspiration " ( Fuller , 1969 ) -- indeed , Campbell himself accepts that his strategy " may seem fanciful in certain respects " . 

  It does not seem to us to be particularly fruitful to discuss highly generalised theories of whether international law is or could be " law " as such : if viewed from the perspective of " effectiveness " , international law may have to be judged differently , depending on whether , for example , the focus is on regional economic relations regulated by treaties , or on customary law applicable to the laws of war on a universal scale . 

  As we shall argue later , such generalised and monolithic views of the legal system are inadequate descriptions of reality , particularly when advanced as the basis of political action . 

  The recognition that the assumption of the effectiveness of law may turn out to be false in all or at least specific areas does not mean that all legal activity in relation to international law is worthless . 

  Indeed , lawyers and others may operate in the belief that international law is an important , though not conclusive , element of the political relationship between states , or that law has an important " symbolic " role to play -- in other words , it adds credence to the political and moral case put forward by the peace movement in a way that does not depend on international law being " effective " . 

  Indeed , breaches of international law are just as important , as evidence of the need to make the political or moral case , and as evidence of the " illegality " of the opposing case . 

  But why is law such an apparently powerful symbol for the peace movement ? 

  Or , to put it another way , what are the symbolic features of law that are worth emphasising ? 

  Both Vogler and Campbell in this section refer to this " symbolic " dimension of law . 

  Vogler regards international law as a useful " rhetorical " device to be deployed in domestic courts whenever possible in the course of litigation involving the peace movement . 

  Campbell argues that " for many , the object of law is to control force " , and that it is only natural that a political movement seeking to control the ultimate force should turn to law . 

  However , it is possible that the attractiveness of law as a symbol for the peace movement is wider than the specific associations with international law and the control of violence . 

  For many , " law " and " order " refer to the ideal of legality ( or " the rule of law " ) -- and while it is clear that this does not refer to an uncontroversial notion , it is arguable that most people would agree on certain core features of the rule of law : a congruence of official action with a previously declared rule so as to preserve individual autonomy and freedom from arbitrary state power , and a notion of equal treatment of individuals in the eye of the law . 

  There are clearly strong links between the ideal of the rule of law and concepts of natural law , and many of the questions that we have already posed in the latter context could be reiterated here . 

  It is arguable that law has become such a potent anti-nuclear symbol because the use and aftermath of nuclear weapons pose such a threat to these values . 

  There is no better example of the uncontrollable exercise of state power , resulting in perhaps the worst invasion of individual autonomy imaginable , than the decision to use nuclear weapons ; and the aftermath of their use reveals the uncontrolled assumption by the state of virtually limitless emergency powers leading to the forced starvation of some of the population and the summary execution of others ( as depicted for example in BBC's " Threads " ) ( Campbell , 1985 ; Laurie , 1983 ) . 

  Indeed , it is arguable that the mere possession of nuclear weapons threatens legality given the measures apparently needed to preserve security and suppress protests depicted in part III of this volume . 

  The symbolic value of law involves more than a volitional commitment to legal institutions and legal process , or the rhetorical effectiveness of international law arguments . 

  It represents or embodies values which the peace movement seeks to achieve in relation to nuclear Weapons , and provides a focus for an otherwise disunited political movement . 

  However , this contains an important message for lawyers sympathetic to the peace movement , since if the symbolic appeal of law for the peace movement is founded in the view that law embodies certain political and human ideals which may be interpreted as being in sympathy with the aims of the peace movement , then it is clear that the attraction is to law as an ideal rather than to lawyers and legal process . 

  If this is the case , then the task of propagating the ideal of legality is not a specifically legal one . 

  However , we would emphasise again that many of the points we have made in relation to natural law and rights theories apply with equal force to arguments based on the rhetoric of the rule of law . 

  HOW NOW LEGAL THEORY ? 

  THE DIFFERENTIATION OF MODERN LAW 

  The contributions in this book and our discussion in the previous sections show that positivist , rights-based or natural law approaches can provide suitable intellectual foundations for legal strategies . 

  At the same time we are faced with the dilemma that these theories appear to be mutually exclusive : does this mean that the peace movement should take a cynical " supermarket " attitude to attempts to theorise law and take from the shelves whatever theoretical package is best suited to the purpose ? 

  Is there any precept that demands consistency . ) 

  In the previous sections we voiced a scepticism of the basic assumptions of the two most important systematic attempts to explain legal systems from within , that is , positivism and natural law . 

  Similar criticisms of these explanations have often been formulated by sociologically-based theories which attempt to reflect the connections between the legal system and the political , cultural and economic systems . 

  These can be further distinguished according to their analysis of the relationship of state , society and economy and can be labelled variously as " realist " , " Marxist " , " functionalist " , " instrumentalist " or " anarchist " . 

  Some of these critiques give mono-casual , but most give multi-dimensional , explanations of the links between law and society . 

  A common denominator both of these critiques and of positivism and natural law theories , is that most of them speak about the law -- even if this is seen to have many facets . 

  The debate between legal theorists and their critics is about the degree of autonomy possessed by the legal system from economy and society , the role of historical , cultural and contingent factors ( the " dynamics " of the legal system ) and about the possibility of giving a coherent explanation to the " internal " structure of the legal system , once its detachment from other factors is recognised . 

  The main assumptions of this debate are structured by concepts and social conventions which through the past centuries have helped us to understand reality : keywords of emerging bourgeois society like " individual " , " society " , " state " , " market " , " democracy " have slightly different connotations in different Western societies and in different periods but -- on the whole -- form the common language with which we communicate about complex processes and attempt to understand and structure them . 

  In recent years these concepts have been questioned from diverse directions . 

  It has been shown that our thinking in terms of models such as " democracy " , " individualism " and " rule of law " does not always adequately reflect reality , and sociological theory has demonstrated that simple notions of causality do not explain complex effects of action ( Luhmann , 1982 ; see also Prigogine and Stenger , 1985 ) ; also , theories of language tell us that we structure reality through the language we use ( Lacan , 1968 ) . 

  Our thesis is that our traditional models and ways of thinking do not allow us to understand complex processes and -- which is worse : often mislead us about appropriate responses . 

  One reaction in the face of this complexity of social systems and the complex role of law has been " pragmatism " , a form of resignation in the face of the difficulties of understanding the complicated role performed by law in complex societies . 

  There is , however , an alternative approach based on the development of a new understanding of law , which no longer assumes that the legal system is uniform but realises that law is linked into complex processes of communication between and within different sub-systems of society , which in turn form and influence the substance of a particular segment of law . 

  To put it another way , law forms both a sub-system of society and part of the environment of other sub-systems such as politics , family , education , economy , etc . 

  Law and the legal system thus have to be seen in a differentiated way , no longer consistently structured by one uniform language and one common principle ( such as a hierarchy of values or a grundnorm ) , but as being to some extent split into a plurality of legal arenas ( Lowi , 1972 ) . 

  Some theorists identify a multitude of " dialects " spoken within one legal system , while others point to changes in the process of law creation : traditional models tend to attribute this to parliament , government and the courts , whereas increasingly it involves those who are themselves subject to legal rules . 

  The increasingly open texture of regulation ( Atiyah , 1985 ) , already analysed by Neumann in the 1930s ( Neumann , 1985 ) , allows wider discretion to , and purposive interpretation by , the administration and the courts who turn -- in a selective way -- to the views of those subject to these rules as guides to decision-making . 

  In this way , the legal system can be said to become " self-reflexive " : it develops the capacity to reformulate the rules by which it functions . 

  There is not enough room here to look at the differences of nuance within this approach , which analyses the crisis of the uniform legal system and the monolithic concept of the state . 

  There are considerable differences in the implications of these analyses as to the possibilities and limitations of actors in these networks of legal arenas , and the role that power plays in predetermining access to these arenas . 

  These are precisely the questions that the peace movement has to address when it contemplates the use of law and many of these aspects are discussed in Part III of the book . 

  This analysis of the differentiation of legal systems is also borne out if we take a comparative perspective . 

  Law undoubtedly plays an important role in structuring modern capitalist and socialist societies ; comparative analysis , however , shows significant differences in the relative importance of law in societies organised along similar economic lines . 

  The question again is whether we can develop a satisfactory theory of the law and the legal system , or whether we must be both more general -- taking into account the role that institutions such as family , church , schools , media , police , army , economy , play -- and more specific -- differentiating the different legal arenas such as courts , administration , police , prisons , etc ? ( see Johnson , Chapter 10 of this volume ) . 

  Comparison also points us to an important dimension of law already discussed : besides regulating behaviour or social relations , legal systems also -- in different societies to different degrees -- contain a symbolic or rhetorical dimension , in other words , law forms part of the ideological system of a society . 

  Thus law often has a dual role to play , not only providing the basis for the " smooth " functioning of society , but also forming part of an interrelated system which functions to provide legitimacy , cohesion , integration and unity . 

  In this context broad concepts like " rule of law " , and entire bodies of law like " international law " or " human rights " , gain an additional dimension : they form part of the everyday discourse of politics and are points of reference in interest conflicts without directly forming part of the legal system . 

  This does not however mean that one can clearly distinguish a concept of " rule of law " in the legal system from " rule of law " as part of the ideological system . 

  There is a complex interrelation of both systems and we can again distinguish different countries in which this dual function of law plays a greater or lesser role : the UK for example , without a written constitution , without a constitutional court , without a long tradition of legal science but with a multitude of extra-legal institutions and ideologies does not rely on legal ideology to the same extent as other countries , for example , West Germany and the USA . 

  Legal concepts , together with the symbolic use of law , play a much greater role in structuring general ideologies in the latter countries ( as Chapters 11 and 13 of this book show ) . 

  The result of our cursory glance at the attempts that have been made at a new perspective on law and the legal system is thus both clear and complicated : the legal system can no longer be understood to be monolithic , but is differentiated , and this differentiation is structured by its relationship to other social sub-systems ; law , moreover , has a different ideological role in different national legal cultures . 

  The consequences for the peace movement -- or for that matter any political movement -- are thus equally complex : general theories about the role of the law , or the state will often be misleading . 

  There is no single answer to questions as to whether the use of law is right or wrong . 

  Each situation under which law is being used either against or by the peace movement will have to be analysed extensively by looking at the specific arena and the specific legal language spoken . 

  Generalisations may be helpful to a certain extent but we have to take into account complex variants which are law-related but not necessarily legal : Richard Vogler ( in Chapter 7 of this volume ) for example , leads us to ask whether the use of law will lead to a bureaucratisation and disintegration of the peace movement as in the 1960s ? 

  What were the factors that contributed to this disintegration -- was it " law " or did other factors play a role ? 

  Are there similar factors today ? 

  Will the legal system react in a similar way ? 

  At the same time , however , we have to add a proviso . 

  Although we have argued for the view that law is differentiated rather than monolithic , we have to stress that there do exist common factors and interrelations , both within specific arenas and within the legal system as a whole , that have to be considered . 

  These common factors are those normative elements of the legal system which help to achieve its internal cohesion . 

  In other words , different legal arenas are not entirely severed from each other , and political movements such as the peace movement will have to bear in mind the impact of its legal activities on legal arenas other than those with which it is immediately engaged : for example , does the encouragement of judicial activism by the peace movement , or an invitation to adjudication based on natural law , open floodgates which -- although they produce desirable results in the short term -- one would in the long term prefer to remain shut ? 

  ( See Chapter 13 of this volume . ) 

  Natural law and rights theories , positivism and contextualism , are in this sense no longer incompatible theories of the law but enter into the legal languages or dialects which are spoken in different or even in the same legal systems . 

  Their function can vary from time to time and place to place . 

  Thus , we can not give the reassuring answer one expects from theories . 

  Instead of arguing that there is one correct answer to questions about the use of law we would advocate a close scrutiny of its context . 

  Legal theories help us to understand and analyse this context in two ways . 

  First , they help to unlock the immanent structure of the legal language spoken in a specific arena . 

  Our argument is that a discussion about whether positivist or natural law theories are correct is as useful as a discussion about whether Italian or Greek is the correct language to speak : it is however useful to recognise that someone is an Italian speaker if one wants to communicate with him . 

  The second aspect seems even more important : it warns against false generalisations and implicit assumptions . 

  For example , the use of law in litigating the illegality of nuclear war may be sensible in the USA and quite foolish in the UK ; while reinforcing legal ideologies may seem sensible in the Netherlands , it may be dangerous in West Germany . 

  It is our view that the " differentiated " view of the legal system for which we have argued provides insights into the structures and processes of the legal system which traditional theories do not , and perhaps more importantly , points to the necessity of analysing both the social context of , and power structures associated with , the legal system when deploying legal arguments on behalf of the peace movement . 

  Moreover , it alerts us to the fact that short-sighted tactics may thwart the overall strategy . 

  Beyond this , however , it can offer no generalised or " off-the-peg " answers to concrete and specific questions , and would caution against attempting such a task . 

  Can Law Control Force ? 

  TOM CAMPBELL 

  Few thoughtful people do not now fear nuclear catastrophe within a period which is infinitesimal when set against the history of mankind . 

  It appears that we may not have long to go . 

  I say nuclear catastrophe partly because any exchange of nuclear arsenals will bear no resemblance to anything that could be called war . 

  There will be no invasions , no developing strategies , no war cabinets , no protracted national efforts , no armistices , no peace settlements . 

  It will all be over in a matter of hours ; an unimaginably horrible episode , but hardly a war . 

  I say nuclear catastrophe rather than nuclear war also because the episode which ends civilisation is as likely to be an accident as it is to be a monstrous design ; the result of human error or foolishness rather than of deliberate choice , an ultimate irony to mock the rational pretensions of the human race . 

  Given these fears and the imminence of their object , it may seem to be rather worse than fiddling while Rome burns to raise in a series of lectures on law and disarmament that essay-worn jurisprudential topic " is international law really law ? " . 

  However , that is precisely what 1 wish to do . 

  I make no real apology for such academicism but 1 will offer an explanation . 

  There are at least two contrasting ways of opposing force : one is with greater force , and the other is with reasons which might influence those who use or are liable to use force to refrain or desist from doing so . 

  The latter way , in addition to its obvious moral appeal may also , in many circumstances , be more effective . 

  While force and the means of destruction are primarily physical realities , the path to their deployment in the manner we now fear is through the emotions and decisions of beings who are able to achieve a measure of control over their actions . 

  This control depends crucially on the way in which they perceive the world including the alternatives to the use of force which they can comprehend and accept . 

  For this reason the manner in which law is presented and understood becomes one facet of the development of a non-violent approach in the control of force . 

  Changing our conception of international law could therefore have a bearing on our capacity tor achieving peace . 

  Conceptual clarification and reordering are , however , hardly sufficient as means of controlling force but they may be a necessary prerequisite for attaining this objective . 

  In opposing human spirit to human force I am not simply setting cognition against physique . 

  It is doubtless the affective aspect of the human soul that is most decisive in our behavioural choices . 

  Envy , greed , hate , fear and the desire to dominate are likely to be the real fingers on the trigger of our destruction . 

  But such emotions are themselves informed by the way in which we see the world , by our conceptions of what it is that we find desirable or fearful . 

  Moreover the control of these emotions and their congruence with other more benign feelings , such as love and sympathy and joy in living , require the exercise of our minds , not only for the calculation of the technical means to achieve our chosen objectives , but for the formulation of the terms in which we describe the world we think we live in , and the reality within which we have to make our choices concerning the use of force . 

  Whether we think in terms of territory or sovereignty , of freedom or property , these or other concepts are crucial ingredients in our world views and hence in the choices which determine the use and control of our physical movements and so ultimately our survival . 

  Concepts , therefore , do have a significant role in the management of force . 

  I am not in fact optimistic about our ability to control the sort of force which is now at large in the world . 

  The capacity of a few -- perhaps a very few -- people to inflict extinction on us , will gradually extend to more and more small groups of human beings , all of whom are liable to exhibit the self-aggrandisement and irrationality which have led to so much unnecessary suffering in the history of our species . 

  But we must try . 

  Our dignity requires that we struggle in the net , however slight the hope of escape . 

  Where , then , may we look for hopeful areas of peace , ways in which this new overwhelmingly destructive and readily deployable force may be contained , not just for a few years , but in our minuscule timespan , for ever ? 

  The balance of power , now a balance of terror , the fear of mutual destruction between nation-state ; , is an obvious avenue to explore . 

  An equality of influence in the world between superpowers in the capacity to annihilate each other ( and ourselves ) may , for a while , alter the course of human history from one of repeated wars of a more or less controlled sort of strictly limited skirmishes in " away from home " territories . 

  This is not a particularly reassuring prospect . 

  States have shown a capacity for self-destruction in the past and wars have come with a regularity which would be monotonous were it not so horrifying ; history belies the claims of statesmen to be in charge of events . 

  Moreover , deterrence rests on fear and fear may lead to panic and panic to the sort of mistakes that will no longer be recoverable . 

  This situation is in turn exacerbated by the internal political pressures on governments , democratic as well as despotic , to maintain a climate of Cold War in order to achieve their domestic objectives . 

  Yet if we are to be realistic in our starting-point we must accept that the relationships which give rise to nuclear catastrophe are likely to be relationships between sovereign states , each able to possess and deploy armed force for their own interests . 

  We must therefore look for some accommodation between states , and this in two important respects : we must seek to further binding agreements between states which limit and reduce the possession as well as the use of nuclear weapons and we must work to control the lesser hostilities whose escalation will always be one of the chief threats of total destruction . 

  This brings us inevitably to international law : the rules which make agreements between states binding ; the rules which seek to limit from the outside the kinds of actions which states may take in relation to each other and provide a framework within which they may negotiate . 

  Certainly it is natural to look to law in some form or another as a force-controlling mechanism ( Watson , 1982 , p. 71 ) . 

  Indeed , for many the object of law is to control force : law is for order and order may be taken to mean the elimination of dispute settlement by the physical power of the parties involved . 

  Legal institutions may employ force but , so it is said , they only use force to combat and overcome those who disrupt order by the use of their own force . 

  This perspective is unduly restrictive of the role of law in its socially instrumental aspects and unduly kind to those who have power over the legislative and judicial functions of states in that to define law in terms of the pursuit of order seems unwarrantably to exclude the use of law to foment disorder when this seems desirable to the politically strong . 

  Indeed a major element of constitutional law concerns ways and means of preventing the abuse of the force given to lawful authorities for the purpose of enforcing the law . 

  By abuse here 1 mean not only illegal uses of violence by those who are in defined circumstances entitled to use force , but the legal use of force where the objectives are antithetical to social order or for some other reasons morally objectionable . 

  Nevertheless , given that it will not do to define law as a means to institutionalise dispute-resolution and so inhibit unregulated conflict , we may surely expect the control of force to be a major objective of law . 

  Municipal legal systems uniformly restrict the use of force , very markedly so in the case of the ordinary citizen , while the occurrence of riots and other manifestations of violence are taken as serious breakdowns of law . 

  Little wonder then that those who seek peace ( that is the absence of violence ) between nations as well as within them should look to law as a means of regulating and reducing the international use of force . 

  Until comparatively recently this hope looked greatly at odds with the realities of international law which was prepared to acknowledge the sovereignty and hence the legality of states whose boundaries or existence are the result of force , uphold treaties imposed by coercion , and in general allow that war is an international sphere . 

  These practices appear to recognise rather than replace the use of force in international relations . 

  We have , however , now outlawed war . 

  The legitimate waging of armed conflict is now confined to self-defence -- an exception which is generally permitted in municipal law . 

  This may be seen as a move to make international law into proper law , or at least international law with one of its essential purposes , the control of force , and , of course , there have long been laws to restrict the type and degree of force used even in legitimate war , and some restrictions on the very legality of wars , for instance when they are in contravention of treaties . 

  Allowing then that international law , at least at present , sets out to control force and therefore to preserve peace , those who would deny its status as law can point to its failure in this respect . 

  The twentieth century is as much a century of war as any other in human history and there has been no diminution in the external use of force by states since war became illegal in 1945 . 

  Of course , no municipal system succeeds in totally eliminating the use of force . 

  Crimes of violence do not negate law , they merely require its better enforcement . 

  A legal system must take steps to control the use of force but it does not have to be totally successful in order to remain a legal system . 

  Insofar as municipal systems set limits to the use of force and punish at least some of those guilty of crimes of violence it has some success as law and an undisputed claim to be regarded as law for as long as the officials of the system pursue these objectives by taking steps against non-compliance ( Hart , 1961 , pp . 79-88 and 213ff . ) . 

  But can the same be said for international law ? 

  It would appear that states prefer to act legally where possible and it is not possible to claim that states are unaffected by legal prohibitions on war , but the regularity with which such a large proportion of states are prepared to use force illegally -- despite their total commitment to law-abidingness within their territories and the apparent lack of any retributive consequences of such illegalities ( unless defeat in war is unhelpfully labelled as a punishment ) -- raise doubts about the parallels between municipal and international law in terms of the parameters of the concept of law . 

  Crucially , it is argued , international law lacks the necessary sanctions and hence the definitionally necessary characteristic of enforceability . 

  It is therefore a matter of morality , depending on the moral conscience and practical discretion of states , not a matter of law . 

  International law does not control force because it is not law . 

  Such an approach to the status of international law is not theoretically neutral ; rather it is a manifestation of that most popular of all jurisprudential theories , the sanction or imperative theory of law in which some version of Austinianism is deployed to say that international law is not a command backed by the effective threat of the use of force against non-compliance and is therefore not law ( Austin , 1861 ) . 

  Extrapolating from the Austinian view , therefore , having outlawed the use of force in international affairs , the next logical step is to make this a genuinely legal matter by deploying superior force against those who commit the relevant illegal acts , so turning moral injunction into legal prohibition . 

  World peace , on this view , requires a proper world court , and most important of all , a world police force . 

  International law will then control force and it will do so because it is real law . 

  Following the pattern of development of municipal law we will be able to outlaw self-help in the enforcement of international law , remove the weapons of violence from the hands of those who might break the law and ensure that no state is a judge in its own cause when it comes to questions of legitimate self-defence or disputes about allegations of aggression . 

  This may be thought to be the legal way to control force . 

  I would counsel against taking this imperatival path , first on the rather weak ground that it is not necessary to do so . 

  As a conceptual analysis of the idea of law , sanction theories of the traditional Austinian type are largely discredited . 

  Too many laws do not fit the required command-backed-by-threats formula for the theory to have credibility ( Campbell , 1983 , ch . 4 ) . 

  Even if we accept the enforceability criterion for the existence of a law this can only be a necessary requirement of law if " enforceability " is taken in a weak sense to mean that the rules in question are by and large adhered to , which need not , of course , be the result of threats . 

  If at least some people and states obey some laws for other reasons , such as moral conviction or non-coerced self-interest , then it is possible that all persons and states might do so . 

  What matters is conformity and not how this conformity is obtained . 

  To define law in terms of one means of obtaining conformity , especially when that means is a manifestation of one of the very phenomena that we are seeking to eliminate ( the use of force ) is to foreclose on other perhaps more defensible methods . 

  More practically I suggest that an extension of the sovereign-power theory into international law is an unhelpful and dangerous thing to do , at least insofar as the avoidance of war is concerned . 

  That which would be required to unite the community of nations includes the use of force on the scale of war and is inherently divisive and self-defeating . 

  The creation of an effective world police force would involve the creation of a military force which we have not the political means to control . 

  A world state , even assuming that it is a highly-devolved federal state , would involve compulsory and sanctioned jurisdiction on a wide range of issues at present regarded as central to the existence of the individual sovereign states which would have to become the subordinate parts of a world state . 

  To bring that about in a timescale which meets the present crisis for world peace would be likely to create the very wars we are seeking to avoid . 

  A situation would arise in which the very order which is the objective of law would have to be violated in order to achieve that objective , and this is unacceptable since international law is not an end in itself , but an instrument to be justified largely by its contribution to the limitation of violence . 

  The paradox of using force to overcome force is here a real contradiction . 

  Further while municipal law can survive a fairly high incidence of order-violation and still fulfil its ordering function , the nature of international conflict is such that comparatively few violations , perhaps only one attempt to resist the lawful force of a world state , might be more than enough to undermine the rationale for the whole edifice of peace law . 

  If traditional positivism is a misleading and potentially catastrophic jurisprudential approach to the control of force in international law , to what theory should we turn ? 

  At this point I think we can make many mistakes . 

  The first mistake is to adopt a form of natural law theory to endow the " moral " conventions of international so-called law with a degree of quasi-legal authority . 

  Treaties must be kept , genocide is forbidden , war is to be indulged in only when vital national interests are at stake . 

  This sort of moral principle , which may be thought to have the backing of international Opinion , and therefore be part of the positive morality of the international community , can readily be dubbed part of natural law , that is , of binding rules of universal application , and at the same time regarded as general principles of international law . 

  I do not think that we should be against such moral principles . 

  They , or something like them , are admirable and important and we must strive to make them political realities , but they are not in themselves law and nothing is gained by pretending that they are law . 

  Indeed , there is much to be lost by so doing because it hinders the conceptualising and hence the realisation of law's distinctive contribution to peace . 

  Moreover , I doubt whether calling moral principles of this sort " natural law " is in accordance with any natural law theory , which standardly requires a form of authoritative promulgation in addition to rational justification , something which is not a feature of existing international law . 

  Nevertheless it is not a mistake to look to a municipal model , for our interest is in what international law can be , not simply what it is . 

  On one such model what law has to offer are certain types of humanly contrived institutions : legislatures , courts , enforcement agencies , and a certain way of going about making and applying binding rules . 

  Although these are hardly the dominant features of international law at present , on this paradigm international law could control force by having courts to make decisions about conflicts of interest between states on the basis of authoritative rules and impartial and effective procedures for the accurate and fair application of these rules to specific circumstances . 

  As such it could be seen as an alternative to armed conflict , an alternative to blind acceptance of an unsatisfactory and perhaps explosive status quo in the control of disputed territory , and even as an alternative to democratic political methods of dispute resolution which can so often lead to legitimately and dangerously dissatisfied minorities . 

  Such a system might have much more to offer in the way of conflict-resolution than the present system of customary principles as a loose framework within which states enter into negotiations . 

  Without entering into the fine detail of what is required for a system of institutional international law it is clear that merely historically-established conventions followed according to the discretion of the participants in international relationships between states is insufficient to constitute law and is better regarded as a form of anarchy . 

  Insufficient because it does not provide what law has to offer , which is first , an authoritative means of deciding what the rules to be applied are : second , an impartial method of applying those rules to particular circumstances , and third , a way of marking that the rules and resultant decisions are binding or non-optional on the parties . 

  At this point it is likely that we may make a second mistake and go for a purely positivist view of law , the view that the nature of law can be appreciated purely by reciting the elements of positing and applying law without reference to its objectives or functions , so that we have a legal system as long as there are institutionalised ways of selecting mandatory rules and some arrangement for an authoritative application of those rules to particular situations . 

  Conceptually this mistake can be pointed out by indicating that unless the rules in question had important relevance to central areas of human concern we would not think of them as constituting a system of law . 

  More importantly , the weakness of such pure positivism is that it detaches law from any rationale which could explain its bindingness . 

  Law binds not because it says it does ( although it does say just that ) but because there are good reasons for accepting its claim to mandatoriness and these good reasons have to do with what law can do for us in certain situations of social opportunity , difficulty and peril . 

  In the case of international law what the institutions of positive law have to offer is a means for settling dangerous disputes and limiting the destructive powers which could be used to resolve those disputes in an unacceptable manner . 

  This device depends on the existence of institutions which can actually adjudicate on and , one hopes , resolve disputes in a relatively impartial way on the basis of impartial rules whose decisions are binding on the parties in question . 

  This is an alternative to war which states could in theory accept without giving up their own moral values , going back on their own factual claims , losing their dignity in the community of nations , or giving up their political endeavours to persuade others to their point of view . 

  Law can not fulfil this function unless the decisions of the legal institutions are binding or non-optional . 

  The whole point of the legal process is to get a decisive determination which will end the dispute in question . 

  The acceptance of the decision , whether or not they believe it to be morally correct , is of the essence of the legal device , the very idea of law . 

  But the narrow idea of bindingness does not in itself take us to a real " ought " , to a genuine obligation ; it only says that if you are going to play the game of law this involves taking the rules and decisions as mandatory or non-optional . 

  The reasons for playing the game , the source of the " ought-bindingness " is the ethical function of law , the purposes which the system serves . 

  It is possible to have a theory of law which stops short of explaining legal obligation as we are aware of it in practice , that is the obligation which articulates the morally-sound reasons for compliance . 

  For this purpose some version of traditional positivism may well do . 

  But such theories are parasitic on an implicit understanding that law is a type of instrument adapted to specific important purposes , and such theories are of little guidance in thinking through the role of international law in controlling force for they can suggest no more than a mimicking of the institutions of municipal law without regard to the purposes of having such or similar institutions in the international context . 

  The theory which I commend as a guide to the fruitful development of international law in the control of force may be called " ethical " or perhaps " functional positivism " . 

  " Positivism " because it requires the standard institutions of positive law for making , recognising and applying binding rules . 

  " Functional " because such institutions have to be seen as serving certain value objectives , in this case primarily the avoidance of war and mutual destruction . 

  " Ethical " because fulfilling this function it seeks to follow a method which has the ethics of impartiality embodied in it , being the ultimate foundation of its bindingness : the ethical imperative of securing a morally justified indeed morally overriding goal in a morally acceptable manner . 

  " Ethical " is to be preferred to " moral " because to speak of " moral positivism " implies that the role of law is simply to apply the moral rules of society , whereas the theory is that law deals with conflict in a way which at least in part transcends the moral disagreements endemic in societies of men or of nations . 

  " Functional " is to be preferred to " instrumental " because the task of dissolving conflict and dispute is not done by a legal method when it is purely conciliation and compromise of a political sort . 

  The legal method involves the effort to apply rules fairly without regard to the comparative political and military strengths of the disputants , so that the goal of order is approached only obliquely or indirectly in the actual judicial process . 

  Perhaps the most important thing about ethical positivism is that it is incompatible with force being the main focus of law's methods and impact . 

  Force is indeed antithetical to its nature at least until its non-coercive authority has been generally accepted in a community . 

  For this reason it neither defines law in terms of force , legitimate or otherwise , nor does it point to literal enforceability as the essence of law . 

  As a theory of law it requires us to accept that there is something intrinsically moral in the legal method . 

  To this extent it is a form of natural law theory ; nearest to Fuller's procedural form of natural law ( Fuller , 1969 ) . 

  However , it is not suggested , pace Fuller , that the internal morality of law is inherent in the most efficient methods of subjecting human conduct to the governance of rules , although there is more strength than has been generally granted in the view that government can only be compatible with the dignity of man if Fuller's eight requirements for making law are satisfied ( Nicholson , 1973-4 ) . 

  In fact it is best not to think of ethical positivism as a theory of natural law because this may lead to consequences which are directly contrary to those sought , namely , the appeal to " higher " laws as a basis for disobeying positive law , and the pursuit of an external validation for the devices of positive law which posits the existence of metaphysical rules to be discovered by a process of moral inspection . 

  For ethical positivism law is a contrivance not a discovery of men . 

  In the case of ethical positivism what is more in focus is the morality which arises from the impartiality of law , the moral authority which comes from a method which places the application of general rules in the hands of impartial judges . 

  In my view legal process embodies some properties which tend to increase the law's trustworthiness as a moral guide although not one which simply incorporates the moral consensus of ordinary life with the rules of the polity . 

  This view is based on the weight which attaches to the processes by which decisions are reached as well as to the content of the decisions made , that is to process or procedural rather than end-state principles . 

  This distinction is familiar enough to the jurist for whom the fairness and therefore the acceptability of a trial may be more a matter of the way in which the trial was conducted than whether or not the verdict reached was in some further sense the right one . 

  A fair trial is one conducted according to certain procedural rules and perhaps one to which the participants bring certain appropriate judicial attitudes , rather than one which reaches the correct verdict . 

  The point here is that we do not have an applicable criterion of a correct verdict other than the one which results from a fair trial ( Rawls , 1972 , pp . 83-9 ) . 

  Now it is clear that we do sometimes have alternative ways of determining guilt and innocence to our own satisfaction and it therefore makes sense to think of a fair trial as a trial designed to produce the correct verdict where correctness is assessable by some other objective standards , but in many cases this is not so and in practice the correct verdict is simply the one which is reached after a fair trial . 

  Thus , in moral deliberation it is not necessarily a confusion of validity and truth to give weight to the way in which a decision is reached as well as or perhaps rather than to the content of the decision reached . 

  Just as we give more weight to the views of an impartial judge , one who is not a party to the dispute in question , than to a partial one , so we give more weight to an impartial moral opinion , one expressed by a person who is not directly involved in the situation being assessed , than To an interested party . 

  Similarly we give more weight to an informed moral judge than to an uninformed one : more weight to the moral opinions of someone capable of extensive reflection and commitment than to a person incapable of concentration and careless about self-contradiction . 

  The moral authority of law gets a foothold in the idea that it is rational to give special consideration to views which result from a process of impartial , informed and capable reflection , and this not simply because this process helps us to know more precisely what will promote independently ascertained moral goals but also because it is liable to result in superior judgements about what goals we ought to pursue ( Campbell , 1971 ) . 

  Much could be said about all these characteristics but of most significance for our purpose is the role of impartiality in relation to legislative and legal reasoning . 

  Impartiality is a concept which has been used to convey many things . 

  In this context we may distinguish ( i ) the impartiality which is part and parcel of making moral or legal-judgments on the basis of formulating universal rules permitting or prohibiting certain types of conduct as distinct from making decisions only about particular persons and particular occasions : the impartiality not just of universalisability but of rules which actually are to be universalised ; ( ii ) the impartiality of being a non-involved person which is particularly relevant to the position of the person who is applying legal or moral rules to particular circumstances and which is directly to do with the characteristics of the judge who according to this standard must have no personal interest in the outcome of the case , but which may also be relevant in the process of legislation since legislators may have particular and personal interests in the outcome of the legislation in question ; ( iii ) there is the idea of impartiality as a norm of moral and judicial reasoning which has to do with giving due consideration to all relevant factors , a practice which may further but is not guaranteed by impartiality of the first two types . 

  If we are looking for advice on a particular situation which affects us then impartiality of the second type is particularly important ; for instance , the judge who assesses the relevant facts and selects the relevant moral or legal rules must not be someone who has something to gain or lose by the outcome , although this presupposes the correctness of the rules to be applied and so takes us back to the impartiality normally associated with legislators , which is a matter of their involvement in determining rules which are not only universalisable but are actually to be universalised , at least within a given community , and to their impartiality in the third sense namely the adequacy of the consideration given to the various relevant considerations . 

  If we regard our guide as simply looking for advice as to what moral rules are correct , unrelated to a particular decision which he is called upon to make or to a particular situation in which he is involved then it will be impartiality of the first and last types which are particularly relevant : that is , the formal requirement that legislation is to be universalised , and the material requirement that the decisions made are based on a consideration of all relevant factors . 

  My suggestion is that impartiality of one type or another and perhaps other qualities of decision-makers might be the basis for regarding the law as a locus of moral authority . 

  This would mean that the question of the law would depend on an examination of the processes of lawmaking to discover the extent to which it conforms to norms such as that of impartiality . 

  If it could be shown , for instance , that we know sufficient about the deliberation of legislators , political and judicial , to be assured , for instance , that they were better informed than we are then this might be a reason for giving weight to the content of the law in deciding what is morally right or wrong in areas where we felt that we lacked sufficient knowledge . 

  Moreover , if the moral judgment which we require to make is one which involves our own personal interest we might reasonably look to the relevant law as representing a less partial view of the matter than our own ; for , without attributing to the law a non-partisan impartiality at variance with most available knowledge about the actual political and legal processes , it might still happen to be less partial and more informed than we are when making judgments about cases which affect us closely . 

  Further -- but more debatably -- if we feel that our own moral values are based on relatively restricted experience and inadequate consideration of alternative values , we might concede that the lawmakers are in a better position to give due and adequate consideration to all morally relevant factors which bear on the critique of moral values . 

  These are I think the various areas in which it is reasonable to raise the possibility that the law could be a moral authority . 

  Ethical positivism is thus a theory of or approach to law , perhaps a way of viewing law , which explicates law as a human contrivance which is appropriate for attaining desirable social objectives in a morally acceptable manner . 

  It bases the idea of obligation to law , reasons for acquiescing in or committing oneself to legal process , on the value of the ends which thus become attainable . 

  For instance , a good reason for observing a law whose content you find objectionable is that it is a law and therefore part of a system of mandatory rules which has value as a system because of its overall results , results which are dependent on subjects observing laws which they find objectionable . 

  This approach to law is an attempt to ethicise legal obligation , and posits as its ideal a situation in which all subjects can obey laws out of a sense of the ethical value of law , a sense which does not require them to be in moral agreement with any of the laws of the system in question . 

  As such it not only rejects the analytical approach to law as a form of sanctioned command or rule , unless sanction is taken to include the force of acceptable self-interest in the absence of humanly-contrived threats designed to alter behaviour . 

  Beyond this the practical stress of sanctions is seen as unhelpful in the development and maintenance of law , since the person who is threatened is not only psychologically less open to accepting the ethical demands of law but may indeed by virtue of the threat be under a reduced ethical obligation to conform to the sanctioned law . 

  Applying this to the realities of international law , the ethical positivist in the first place rejects the search for an intuited or reasoned " natural law " on which to base international law , for he views law as a human creation to serve those human objectives which survive ethical criticism . 

  The natural law method , it is alleged , distorts moral reasoning , is ontologically unsound , dangerously anarchical and distracts our attention from the essential task of contriving positive laws of justiciable form and content . 

  Further the ethical positivist will reject the move towards giving the organs of international law teeth of a physical sort to any significant degree , on the grounds that this undermines the ethical authority of the system and in present circumstances renders impossible the move towards the developments required in international law if it is to act as an acceptable method of dispute resolution . 

  The ethical positivist is likely to seek the development of three broad directions ; first , the drafting and annunciation through the UN of a comprehensive set of rules applying to the relationships between states , including where necessary cognisance of those aspects of internal affairs which are of international significance . 

  These rules must have that generality and universality which make them ingredients in impartial determinations and sufficient precision and bite to be used in making genuine resolutions of disputes , for instance , over territory ; second , the extension of the role and jurisdiction of juridically sound international courts on the model of the International Court of Justice , to which there will be compulsory reference of disorder endangering disputes to be decided by the application of the relevant set of reformed international laws , and the decisions of which would be mandatory with no reservations permitted ; 4 third , the massive extension of non-coercive jural agencies in the area of enforcement where this is taken to mean the monitoring of the behaviour of states in relation to international law and the decisions of international courts . 

  Such a programme may seem fanciful in certain respects . 

  Can we expect to achieve sufficient political agreement to formulate the necessary dispute-resolving rules in an ideologically divided world , even if the avowed intention is to establish rules which are neutral as between such ideologies , the acceptance of which would not be taken as manifesting more than a commitment to getting some agreed rules ? 

  Further , can we expect states to agree to accept such a system , particularly with compulsory reference to international courts and mandatory application of their decisions , even if there are not sanctions attached to non-adherence ? 

  And can we expect states to allow non-coercive jural agencies to gather information in an effective manner when this involves the divulgence of state secrets , even if this is seen as the only way to secure confidence in , for instance , disarmament treaties ? 

  Again , can we devise a system in which judges will be appointed and will function independently of the particular political interests of member-states and view their decisions in terms of law and not politics ? 

  These are all very real problems but a great deal will depend on the extent to which mutual destruction is seen as a real possibility , and on the extent to which international law can be presented as an effective contrivance for the acceptable resolution of international conflict . 

  Much is contingent on the intelligence of our political systems and the chances of world history which may yet give us such a fright that something commensurable to the strides made by the creation of the UN in 1945 will be made possible . 

  Also of practical importance is the rejection of the imperatival path of sanction deployment as if international law could emerge as some form of ultimate deterrent . 

  This requires the intense work of international political theorists in relation to the creation of a legislative process for international law . 

  Also required is the exponential growth of the existing cohort of impartial international judges , and their effective protection from partial political pressures . 

  In conclusion I will make some comments on the requisites for effective rules relating to the control of armed conflicts . 

  What is required here are rules which courts can use to distinguish between legal and illegal armed conflicts , and between legal and illegal methods of conducting legal armed conflicts . 

  Clearly the current situation in which the use of force is illegal except in self-defence is inadequate . 

  Quite apart from the need to withdraw from states the right to make up their own minds as to what counts as self-defence , a set of rules more in accordance with historical change and moral consensus is required . 

  Some place must be found for the principle of self-determination as a basis for altering international boundaries and the controlled and limited use of force in the service of this principle , and , in order to establish the boundaries of such legitimate force , it will be necessary to establish rules to which appeal can be made for the settlement of territorial disputes by international courts as an essential precondition of the legitimate resort to force . 

  Then there is a need for rules which legitimate the intervention of one state in the internal affairs of another where this is a matter of urgent humanity . 

  There is no point in having a law forbidding such wars which outlaw such events as the recent Tanzanian intervention in Uganda , an event which was met by a stunning silence from the international community insofar as the evident illegality of the operation was concerned . 

  Such a situation is one which allows other countries to put aside international law and act according to their own judgments . 

  The development of the law of peace along these lines would not be a return to the acceptance of the legality of armed conflict as an instrument of national policy , but it would involve the articulation of a theory of the just war , however dangerous this may seem . 

  Only such a theory can generate rules which can be accepted as having the sort of ethical authority that is required for international law to be taken seriously as the ultimate arbiter of international relations . 

  It is not that the outlawing of all war apart from the overwhelming necessities of self-defence is unrealistic and therefore inevitably unefficacious as a means for controlling force , but rather that it runs counter to the sort of moral consensus on which the ethical authority of international law could be based . 

  The move to develop justiciable and acceptable rules for the control of armed conflict is simply one aspect of the programme for using international law to control force which follows from the approach of ethical positivism . 

  It may well be that such an approach is incommensurate with the difficulties presented by international disagreements and internal conflicts but it does suggest a way of looking at law which enhances its potential as an instrument for peace . 

  If law can contribute to the control of the sort of force which threatens nuclear catastrophe then it is likely to be law seen as a morally authoritative contrivance for securing the overriding objective of human survival . 

  A Right to Tax Diversion ? 

  The State and the Citizen 

  JAMES DIGNAN 

  The idea of refusing to pay tax , based on a person's moral opposition to the purpose for which it is raised is not a new one . 

  Among the earliest known tax-resisters were the early Christians who refused to pay tax to finance the building of Caesar's pagan temple in Rome ( Mayer , 1969 , p. 133 ) . 

  Subsequently , however , tax-resistance on moral grounds has been centred largely , though not exclusively , on objection to " war tax " . 

  As such , it has not hitherto constituted a particularly significant form of protest either numerically or politically . 

  In part the practical difficulty of withholding tax most of which is deducted at source has prevented it from ever assuming large-scale proportions , while the fact that opposition has in the past tended to focus on specific wars , of which the Vietnam war was the most prominent recent example , ensured that it was usually a relatively transient phenomenon . 

  However the recent revival of interest in the practice , which can be traced back to 1977 , represents a new departure , rendering it of far greater potential significance than it has previously assumed . 

  This is partly because of a number of important changes that have taken place in the scale of the protest , the targets against which it has been directed , and the tactics that have been employed , but particularly because of some fundamental changes in the broader political social and economic context in which the protest is now taking place . 

  In 1977 growing social opposition to the scale of military spending in general and the priority accorded to it over other heads of government expenditure , linked with a more specific objection against nuclear weapons culminated in the launching of political campaigns , in both the UK and the USA , to put the issue of tax-resistance onto the legislative agenda . 

  What had hitherto been a sporadic , locally-based protest movement directed against specific wars thus acquired an international dimension of steadily increasing significance and coalesced around these two much broader issues which are of considerably more lasting and widespread concern . 

  The emergence of these two campaigns also marked an important tactical shift in the response to the failure of earlier attempts by individuals in both the UK and the USA to secure judicial recognition for the practice of withholding tax destined for military expenditure . 

  Thus , both the Peace Tax Campaign in the UK , and the campaign to promote a World Peace Tax Fund Act in the USA adopted a primarily political strategy which was aimed at giving conscientious tax-resisters a statutory right of tax diversion , and at establishing appropriate machinery to make that right effective . 

  Although litigation in support of such a claim has by no means been abandoned , the switch to a more overt political campaign raises the possibility of developing a more co-ordinated test-case strategy -- in place of the ad hoc response previously resorted to -- of the type developed in pursuit of civil right advocacy in the . USA , and welfare rights advocacy both there and in the UK , to try to influence the course of social change . 

  Important though these changes in the nature of the tax resistance movement are , however , perhaps it would be a mistake to view them as an isolated phenomenon , and to try to assess their moral and legal implications without also addressing some even more fundamental contemporary political , economic and social developments with which they are closely associated . 

  First , and of most immediate relevance as far as the tax-protest movement is concerned , the past two decades have witnessed a remarkable change in the nature of political dissent which has increasingly assumed unconstitutional and , on occasions , violent forms . 

  While this has sometimes been aimed at the complete subversion and overthrow of the established political order , as in the case of the Bader-Meinhoff group in West Germany and the Italian Red Brigades , more recently it is concern over nuclear weapons , and specifically the installation of cruise missiles that has engendered extra-constitutional forms of dissent both in this country and abroad . 

  No doubt this tendency may be attributable , at least in part , to a lack of responsiveness on the part of the authorities to widespread fears and legitimate demands , even when these are expressed in a constitutional manner by broad sectors of the public , particularly as in the case of the recent deployment of cruise missiles . 

  Moreover , the reaction of the authorities to these initiatives has in turn itself violated constitutional principles , 4 thereby engendering further disillusionment and protest . 

  Although the Peace Tax Campaign has so far eschewed the use of extra-constitutional forms of dissent , confining itself for the most part to orthodox expressions of protest such as parliamentary lobbying and legal action in the courts , the failure of conventional forms of political protest to influence the prevailing defence strategy/ taxation policy could have important implications regarding the future choice of tactics to be used . 

  Second , despite the state's vast law-enforcement apparatus it appears increasingly incapable of securing and maintaining for its citizens the wholesomeness and amenity of their physical environment , or even the long-term physical well-being of the citizens themselves . 

  Moreover recent events at Sellafield indicate that that enforcement apparatus is more likely to be used against environmentally-conscious groups such as Greenpeace at the behest of public bodies like BNFL which are responsible for inflicting the damage on the environment in the first place . 

  This particular example highlights two additional shortcomings which afflict our conventional political institutions . 

  First , despite the growing realisation on the part of a sizable minority of the population of the damage done to the environment and the quality of life , in the interests of economic growth and national security , this increasing public concern is a constituency that is not adequately represented in our decision-making processes at whatever level . 

  Second , a vast increase in the level of state intervention in a variety of spheres ( Friedman , 1971 and 1972 , ch . 10 ) has been accompanied by the development of new forms of state regulation in which discretion and informal controls exercised through devices such as circulars , tax concessions and various methods of state economic management ( Daintith , 1979 ) are accorded much greater prominence than formal " legal " measures . 

  As a result , large spheres of state activity and numerous forms of state regulation are beyond the reach of conventional levers of legal and political control . 

  Third , the so-called " welfare state " has so far appeared unable to remedy any but the grossest forms of economic and social deprivation or effectively to restrict the range of wider socio-economic inequalities , in spite of the fiscal burden imposed on the population and the productive system as a whole . 

  This must be a matter of concern for any group advocating a right to divert taxes on moral grounds , if only because of the " floodgates " argument which it is likely to provoke in response . 

  Moreover any rights theory which would justify a right of conscientious war-tax diversion without addressing these inequalities would appear defective to many . 

  Fourth , and perhaps most significant , the state appears increasingly unable to sustain an adequate level of economic growth in the face of inflationary and recessionary trends . 

  If this state of affairs continues the state will be denied an important source of legitimation for its own authority -- namely the promise ( which it has held out in the past ) of a steady increase in the level of material well-being enjoyed by the population as a whole ( Poggi , 1978 ; Winkler , 1975 ; Poulantzas , 1978 ; Habermas , 1971 , 1976 ) . 

  It may also bring to a head a number of crucial questions about spreading priorities -- for example , defence versus social security spending -- when the oil revenues begin to decline over the coming years . 

  Seen in this much broader context the campaign over the peace-tax issue is obviously at most a relatively minor skirmish in a very much larger battle , one that is being fought , as is the peace-tax issue itself , on the terrain of classical political and constitutional theory -- namely , the relationship between citizens and the state . 

  For the interconnected problems outlined above call strongly into question the ability of the present institutional apparatus of the state to respond in an appropriate manner to the various challenges which currently confront it . 

  Not surprisingly , these developments have been accompanied by calls from various quarters for a thoroughgoing theoretical reappraisal of our contemporary political and constitutional wisdoms . 

  Thus Professor MacPherson has provided an analysis of the principal shortcomings of current liberal-democratic theories and has offered a revised model which he calls " participatory democracy " , and which is based on a humanist Marxist perspective ( MacPherson , 1972 , 1973 , 1977 ) . 

  More recently , professor Griffith has spoken of the need for a new jurisprudence for public law , which he suggests might best be founded on some ( unspecified ) modern variant of utilitarianism ( Griffith , 1981 ) . 

  Tony Prosser ( Prosser , 1982 ) meanwhile has also argued for a new critical and objective theory of public law , in his case derived from Habermas's work on communicative competence . 

  Although the details of the prescriptions advanced in each case may vary , there is some similarity in the nature of the diagnosis which each offers for what it is that currently afflicts our ailing body politic . 

  At the risk of being accused of being a pedlar of yet another quack remedy I wish to argue that a rights-based theory , derived in part from the influential rights thesis recently put forward by Ronald Dworkin ( Dworkin , 1978 ) , is also capable of addressing some of these difficulties confronted by our orthodox political and constitutional theories , in addition to its more immediate relevance with regard to the specific issue of tax diversion ( Dignan , 1983 ) , and other civil libertarian issues ; though to do so it stands in need of some revision . 

  In tentatively proposing such a theory I take it that any acceptable political or moral theory must be capable of satisfying the following demands . 

  First , it must address itself in a relevant fashion to the kind of issues identified above , that is , it must be grounded in the moral social , economic and political problems of the late twentieth century , in contrast to our prevailing political and constitutional orthodoxies which originated in , and address themselves almost exclusively to mid-nineteenth century concerns . 

  Second , I would agree with Tony Prosser ( Prosser , 1982 ) that any theory should be based on an analysis which makes it possible to describe and explain existing social relations and the operation of state institutions ; and that it should provide the means for an effective critique of the latter and point the way for their future development . 

  Third , it should combine pragmatism with realism . 

  Thus , consideration should be given to the way in which policy goals may be effectively translated into political and legal reality , based on both a realistic perception of the obstacles that have to be overcome and an accurate assessment of the contribution which lawyers and litigation may make in promoting desirable social change . 

  PROBLEMS CONFRONTING OUR CONVENTIONAL POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS 

  In seeking to account for the shortcomings which have previously been identified in respect of our conventional political institutions it may be helpful to make use of a typology developed in a slightly different though related context by Kamenka and Tay ( Kamenka and Tay , 1975 ; Kamenka and Tay , 1980 ) . 

  Our current system of representative government based on a democratic franchise was fashioned in the mid-nineteenth century during the era of competitive liberal capitalism . 

  This has been characterised by Kamenka and Tay in terms of one of three great paradigms of social ideology , social organisation , law and administration , which they call the gesellschaft model of society . 

  This gesellschaft model presupposes a society made up of atomic individuals pursuing private interests , in competition with one another , in which the principle of individual enterprise constitutes the chief mechanism for the allocation of resources . 

  The role which it envisages for the state is limited to that of providing the minimum framework necessary for the regulation of competing private interests , while the gesellschaft model of law is conceived in terms of formally defining the equivalent individual rights that are required to make the market work . 

  Macpherson has argued convincingly that it was in the context of just such a society that the case For a representative democracy was initially accepted , first as a logical requirement to protect acquisitive , self-interested and conflicting individuals ( from rapacious governments and from one another ) and second to establish and nurture a free market economy ( MacPherson , 1977 ) . 

  It is now widely accepted that since the era of competitive liberal capitalism , fundamental changes have taken place , particularly as regards the increasingly interventionist role of the state . 

  This has even displaced the market mechanism as an allocator of resources in certain areas , thereby politicising spheres of activity formerly left to the market to perform . 

  Such developments are perceived by Kamenka and Tay as betokening a shift away from a gesellschaft model of law and society , towards a bureaucratic administrative social and legal order . 

  The central presupposition in this model is not the atomic individual , but a non-human abstracted ruling interest or public policy , for example that of efficiency in the running of a transport system . 

  This shift is considered to have generated a crisis in law and legal ideology for under bureaucratic administrative regulations law has increasingly become a means of implementing programmes of action to advance political goals which are identified in terms of the public interest . 

  Such laws frequently confer considerable discretionary authority on public administrators . 

  Moreover this form of regulation is closely associated with the emergence of new institutional machinery such as quangos , and regulatory agencies , which are not easily assimilated into orthodox public law concepts . 

  The latter are still for the most part wedded to the gesellschaft model -- hence the crisis in legal ideology . 

  As a result , the vast extension of government administration into so many fields formerly subject to private determination has outgrown the capacity of traditional judicial machinery to subject it to control . 

  In the political sphere also it is possible to detect a parallel crisis developing in respect of orthodox democratic theory based on the conventional model of representative democracy , For one thing the traditional mechanisms of political control and accountability exercised through parliament have been rendered increasingly ineffective by the ascending power of the executive . 

  This is based in part on the growth of effective party organisation , which has steadily weakened parliament's original critical role , and in part on the emergence of a complex civil service structure with access to information and technical expertise that are denied to ordinary Members of Parliament ( Poggi , 1978 ; Crossman , 1963 and 1975-7 ) . 

  In conjunction with these developments , the increased involvement by the state in the quest for economic growth , and a growing preoccupation with national security has had the effect of converting issues of political policy into purely technical ones . 

  The need for political choice from among a range of policy options is thus played down , in favour of a managerial and technical response to practical problems . 

  As a result the public interest is increasingly defined by expert professional administrators , and administrative decisions designed to promote the public interest are articulated in a language that screens them from effective parliamentary criticisms and public debate . 

  It should perhaps be noted that in spite of the shift from a gesellschaft to a bureaucratic administrative type of law and social regulation which has been outlined above , private ( essentially property-related ) interests continue to be well-served by the existing representative model of democracy , in spite of its imperfections as a means of exercising political control and accountability over policy-making . 

  This is partly because the effect of the state's role in the economic sphere has largely been in support of continued private capital accumulation . 

  But also the party system itself is credited by MacPherson as being chiefly responsible for the preservation of the institution of private property and the market mechanism , notwithstanding the extension of the franchise which took place during the nineteenth century . 

  For he explains that the function of the party system has been to blur the conflict of class since each party has been obliged to appeal to " the common good " in pursuit of long-term majority support . 

  As a result it is highly unlikely that a party with a serious commitment to any substantial change in the institutional form of the market would ever get elected as it would be portrayed and perceived as being " too extreme " . 

  The net result of this state of affairs is that there exist citadels of private economic power ( Unger , 1983 ) -- that is , relatively small groups of people who are in a position to control the basic terms of collective prosperity by making crucial decisions about investment and deployment of capital . 

  These decisions are not , of course , subject to any effective process of democratic accountability and , for the reasons already outlined , these citadels of private economic power are themselves effectively beyond the pale of normal party political conflict . 

  So , in both the public and the private sphere , there are now substantial accretions of power that are not subject to any effective means of either political or judicial control . 

  Perhaps the most serious defect of the current representative model of English politics though is that it disenfranchises , in a double sense , the broader electorate which falls outside the established consensus . 

  Disenfranchisement in the first sense relates to the virtual exclusion of certain substantive issues from the ordinary political agenda . 

  These include , first , any calls for a radical restructuring of society in which new structures and processes of government are sought which would significantly alter the balance between governors and governed ; second , calls for greater priority to be given to social , community and ecological factors in decision-making and lower priority to be given to economic and technological factors which are geared towards reproducing or sustaining the kind of society that exists at present ; and , third , calls for a significant change in defence policy , for example , a renunciation of nuclear weapons , neutralism or disengagement from military alliances such as NATO ( McAuslan , 1980 , p. 6 ) . 

  Thus political programmes that envisage an alternative form of society , or even major institutional changes in the way that existing society is constituted , are effectively disenfranchised by the current model of representative democracy . 

  Disenfranchisement takes place in a second , procedural , sense , by virtue of the almost total absence of opportunities for ordinary people to take part in , and effectively contribute to the decision-making process at whatever level , in the outcome of which they feel they have an interest . 

  The interest which is most frequently , though not exclusively , excluded from participation is one based on feelings of " public concern " , for example , over the environment , or quality of life , as opposed to private , property-related interests , or the public interest , which is articulated by professional public administrators . 

  Moreover , even where such opportunities for participation in the decision-making process do appear to exist , as for example in the public local inquiry , they frequently turn out on closer inspection to be disingenuous as McAuslan and others have demonstrated in respect of the Windscale Inquiry ( McAuslan , 1980 ; Breach , 1978 ) . 

  Thus gestures in the direction of participation are very rarely premissed on the basis of any considered political theory , much less on the adoption of any fundamental moral position . 

  It is time now to consider what contribution a rights-based theory might be able to make in developing such a moral position , and how that position might relate to a revised , more radical form of democratic theory . 

  A RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH 

  In formulating any rights-based theory , the obvious starting-point is the influential theory of rights recently advanced by Ronald Dworkin ( Dworkin , 1978 ) . 

  His theory is of particular interest , first , because of the way he characterises rights as stopping principles . 

  Where rights ( at least in the strong sense in which he uses the term ) are in play , they operate like political trumps to defeat arguments founded on appeals to general social utility which would normally be accepted as a sufficient justification for overriding the wishes of an individual . 

  In effect they confer on the individual a sphere of immunity against interference by the state , other organisations and other individuals . 

  The only ground on which such a right could be defeated , according to Dworkin , would be a competing right advanced by another individual , and even then one such right could not be taken automatically to subordinate another . 

  The second feature which is of interest in Dworkin's formulation is the way in which the content of rights is derived from two non-controversial ultimate moral principles . 

  One is the notion of human dignity which has come to pervade modern ethical and social thought in the West . 

  It is closely associated with Kant's assertion that there are ways of treating a man which are inconsistent with recognising him as a full member of the community so that such treatment is profoundly unjust . 

  The other is the idea of political equality which presupposes that " the weaker members of a political community are entitled to the same concern and respect of their government as the more powerful members have secured for themselves , so that if some men have freedom of decision whatever the effect on the general good , then all men must have the same freedom " ( Dworkin , 1978 , p. 199 ) . 

  These two principles which are both firmly embedded in the liberal political tradition are run together by Dworkin to provide a master principle of equal concern and respect . 

  So individuals may only have rights against their government in the strong sense of being immune to the countervailing claims of general utility if those rights may be derived from that overriding principle of equal concern and respect . 

  How does this theoretical approach fare in relation to the problems which were outlined in the opening section ? 

  I have elsewhere tried to show ( Dignan , 1983 ) that as far as the peace-tax issue itself is concerned the principle of equal concern and respect does generate a right to divert an appropriate amount of income tax from military to peaceful expenditure . 

  The argument rests on an analogy with the right of conscientious objection which is supported by Dworkin . 

  For , just as the individual has the moral right not to kill in violation of his own moral principles , a right recognised by law in this country since 1916 , so also it can be argued that he has the right not to be required to contribute through his taxes towards the maintenance of a professional army equipped with weapons of mass destruction to kill on his behalf . 

  In each case the principle of equal concern and respect requires the government to take account of the individual's convictions . 

  Failure to do so constitutes an invasion of personality which the state is not entitled to commit if its claim to respect individual rights is to be taken seriously . 

  Moreover , as Steven Lukes has persuasively argued , the idea of autonomy ( of which conscientious reflection is a crucial component ) is also intimately related to the idea of equal respect for persons . 

  For one way of denying someone the respect to which he is entitled is by failing to treat him as an autonomous agent , for example , by unreasonably restricting the range of alternative courses of action from which he can choose . 

  Yet when tax is deducted at source , as is the case with a Pay-As-You-Earn scheme , that is precisely what happens . 

  The individual is denied even the opportunity to break the law on conscientious grounds . 

  If a right to conscientious tax diversion can be established in this way , then , if it is to mean anything at all , it must be proof against standard utilitarian objections , for example , those relating to the cost of administering such a scheme . 

  However there is one powerful objection that must be considered , namely the so-called " floodgates " argument , which is based on the fear that if such a concession were granted to war-tax protesters , the door would then be opened for other tax-refusal campaigns in opposition to various other governmental activities , including , perhaps , opposition to paying tax for welfare . 

  In fact , a close reading of Dworkin's theory indicates that there is no inconsistency in both advocating a right of conscientious war-tax diversion and denying such a right in the case of the welfare-tax protester . 

  What is also indicated , though , is a serious shortcoming in the scope of Dworkin's theory in relation to the broader issue of social and economic inequality to which reference was made earlier . 

  As has been seen , the only ground on which a right in the strong sense can be defeated is an even weightier competing right advanced by another individual . 

  In the case of the conscientious war-tax protester it is difficult to conceive of any such competing right which may be plausibly argued against them since their action neither threatens direct violence to others nor does it appear significantly to increase the risk of violent attack from elsewhere . 

  Dworkin himself suggests that no one has an individual right to have enforced all the laws of the nation , only those which he would have a right to have enacted if they were not already law . 

  While laws against personal assault probably fall into this category , it is clear that no one has an individual right to a particular defence policy . 

  As for the case of the welfare-tax protesters Dworkin implies that they have no right in the strong sense to withhold their tax . 

  Presumably this must be because , unlike the war-tax protesters , they do succumb to a competing individual right which is capable of being derived from the principle of equal concern and respect . 

  This would only be the case if the latter entitled the individual to look to the government for the provision of certain welfare benefits . 

  A great many liberal writers , Dworkin included , would support just such a proposition which is consistent with Rawls's well-known thesis that the individual , and particularly the least well-off , do have certain economic rights against the state , founded on justice , which not even the welfare of society as a whole can override . 

  However , like Rawls , Dworkin's commitment to equality in the economic sphere is somewhat limited . 

  Thus , he differentiates between two different ideas which might be encompassed by the concept of equality . 

  One is the right to exactly equal treatment , that is , to the same distribution of goods or opportunities as everyone else has . 

  The other is the right to treatment as an equal , or , as Dworkin puts it " the right to equal concern and respect in the political decision about how these goods and opportunities are to be distributed " ( Dworkin , 1978 , p. 273 ) . 

  Dworkin makes it clear that he considers the second principle to be the more fundamental one under a liberal conception of equality . 

  What this means is that overall economic policy should be dictated by utilitarian considerations , aiming to improve the general welfare . 

  Only if some people , " because of their special circumstances -- because they are crippled or lack talents prized in the market , or for some such reason -- end up below the minimum standard of living required to lead a decent , self-fulfilling life at all " ( Dworkin , 1978a , pp . 244 , 258 ) would they have a right to " a minimum standard " , even at the expense of the general welfare . 

  It is true that this formulation of treating a person as an equal is consistent with the traditional liberal conception of equality , amounting to the familiar idea of equality of opportunity , and even this restricted concept of equality appears capable of generating a competing individual right which is strong enough to defeat the welfare-tax protester's claim to be allowed to divert some of his tax into non-welfare spending schemes . 

  However , as MacPherson and others have pointed out , such a formulation fails to come to terms with the central dilemma confronting liberalism , which is that in an unequal society , where some people come to depend on provision made by others in order to pursue their livelihood , all are not equally able to lead a fully human existence . 

  Indeed Lukes has very plausibly argued that equality of opportunity fundamentally conflicts with the idea of equal concern and respect ( Lukes , 1973 , p. 126 ) . 

  At any rate , the scope of Dworkin's rights theory as currently formulated is plainly too narrow to generate the kind of economic rights that might be consistent with an equal right to self-development . 

  Even more seriously , the same criticism is applicable also in respect of Dworkin's treatment of the public law sphere of decision-making and dispute-settlement processes . 

  For Dworkin's rights thesis is put forward in the context of an institutional environment which operates a clear division of labour between courts and other institutions in terms of the kind of argument which may be deployed in each ( Brownsword and Harden , 1981 ) . 

  This division of labour rests in turn on a fundamental distinction drawn by Dworkin between arguments of principle on the one hand , and arguments of policy on the other . 

  Dworkin's theory of adjudication makes it clear that the function of the courts is limited to that of reaching decisions based upon arguments of principle , that is , arguments which justify a decision by showing that it secures or respects some individual or group right . 

  Courts are not authorised to use directly arguments of policy in defence of their decisions . 

  Thus they are not to ask how their decisions can best promote the general welfare . 

  Other institutions , on the other hand , are entitled to use arguments of policy in support of their decisions . 

  This very rigid institutional division of labour has rather serious implications in the public law field of decision-making processes , however . 

  For the category of policy issues is taken to embrace not only substantive political decisions , such as the decision whether to build a nuclear power station , or a motorway , but also procedural political decisions such as those relating to the form of the decision-making process itself . 

  An example of just such an issue was provided by the controversial case of Bushell v. 

  Secretary of State for the Environment , in which the question arose as to whether objectors to a motorway scheme were entitled to cross-examine the Department of the Environment's witnesses in the public local inquiry considering the scheme . 

  Dworkin makes it clear that as the question of what form the public hearing should assume is itself a policy question , it is , accordingly , beyond the remit of the courts to interfere with this . 

  Accordingly , he considers that individuals have no procedural rights to participate in what are plainly policy decisions , beyond their right to participate periodically in the election of governments -- unless , of course , such rights are specifically conferred on them by some statute . 

  However , the justification for excluding such background policy issues from the jurisdiction of the courts would appear to rest on two grounds , both of which may be open to question in the light of the foregoing analysis . 

  First , there is the assumption that it is fair and safe to con fine policy decisions to institutions other than the courts . 

  It is clear that Dworkin does make this assumption . 

  For he suggests that parliamentary democracy is an egalitarian way of deciding certain policy issues , such as what the criminal laws of a community should be ( Dworkin , 1978a , p. 258 ) , and elsewhere , in respect of a more restricted class of ( moral ) policy issues , he has this to say : " Under certain circumstances that issue should be left to democratic institutions to decide , not because a legislature or parliament will necessarily be correct , but because that is a fair way , in these circumstances , to decide moral issues about which reasonable and fair people disagree " ( Dworkin , 1981 , p. 208 ) . 

  However , if it were true , as has been suggested , that certain issues and constituencies are systematically disenfranchised by the traditional representative model of English politics , this would greatly weaken the justification for reserving to the legislature the exclusive right to determine the form of second-level policy-making institutions such as public local inquiries , and to decide what procedural entitlements should be afforded to objectors at them . 

  The recent work by McAuslan and others ( supra ) in respect of the functioning of the Windscale Inquiry casts further doubt on the fairness of our current practice of leaving it solely to the legislature to determine the form and procedure to be adopted at such inquiries . 

  For although purporting to provide a degree of public participation in the making of a major policy decision , detailed examination of the institutional machinery provided by the government revealed that it was far from being a neutral forum in which the choice of options remained open until determined by the Inquiry . 

  Instead the structure chosen for the Inquiry ensured that it could only be resolved in favour of the course supported by the government . 

  Now if the decision-making process consistently advances policies which unfairly benefit or disadvantage certain groups it does not seem desirable in principle to prevent the courts from reviewing the fairness of that process by confronting the background policy issues involved . 

  Of course it by no means follows that the courts themselves are any less immune from the risks of unfairness or inefficiency in their pursuit of policy objectives , especially as currently constituted . 

  Nevertheless it does seem undesirable that our present institutional framework should be beyond the scope of effective challenge by either political or legal means . 

  Indeed if we recall Dworkin's own formulation of the principle of political equality which lies at the heart of his master-principle of equal concern and respect it would appear to support the criticisms just advanced . 

  This idea of political equality , he suggested , presupposed that " the weaker members of a political community are entitled to the same concern and respect of their government as the more powerful members have secured for themselves , so that if some men have freedom whatever the effect on the general good , all men must have the same freedom " . 

  In fact , however , Dworkin's rather rigid division of labour , and the inflexible institutional framework in which it operates appears ill-equipped to ensure that the best or fairest policy decisions are reached , particularly during a time of rapid political economic and social change . 

  The heart of the problem appears to be that this institutional framework is itself founded on a conventional gesellschaft- type representative model . 

  As a result the function of second-level policy-making institutions such as Public Local Inquiries is seen in terms of merely affording an opportunity for those whose private individual rights and interests may be affected by a policy proposal , to make this known to those responsible for making the decision . 

  As far as this representative model is concerned procedural entitlements are viewed in purely instrumental terms , according to the contribution they may be expected to make to the accuracy of the underlying substantive policy judgments , and since no one has a right to a particular policy outcome , no one has aright either to any particular form of decision-making process . 

  This brings us on to the second of Dworkin's grounds for excluding such background policy issues from the jurisdiction of the courts , for if no one has a right to any particular form of decision-making process -- whether a right to a hearing itself , a right to cross-examine witnesses or to be given reasons for a decision -this can only be because such a right can not be derived from the master principle of equal concern and respect . 

  However it is by no means self-evident that the latter is incapable of generating a right to participate in the policy-making process , at least where fundamental issues of policy are concerned . 

  Once again Steven Lukes rather more persuasively argues that : 

  But the reason why Dworkin's rights thesis appears too narrow to generate a right of participation is because it too is firmly grounded in a gesellschaft model of law and society in which virtually the only interests which are considered capable of generating rights in the strong sense are those appropriate for abstract individuals pursuing their own private interests . 

  Thus , although he does not enumerate a catalogue of rights it seems clear that it is chiefly the conventional political and civil liberties , including a right to freedom of conscience , that are associated with the traditional doctrine of liberalism which would qualify as rights in the strong sense . 

  Dworkin confirms this himself when he points out that Rawls's basic liberties " are in fact rights in the sense I am using " . 

  It should now be apparent that for any rights theory to be capable of satisfactorily addressing the broader problems which now confront our traditional representative institutions it will need to transcend the essentially liberal principles which lie at the heart of Dworkin's thesis . 

  The most promising way of achieving this might be to take more seriously Dworkin's own master principle of equal concern and respect , for , as has been seen , this does appear capable of generating a right of equality which transcends that of equality of opportunity , and a right of effective participation in the decision-making process which would go far beyond the right to vote in a general election once every five years . 

  For a right of participation to be meaningful it would obviously require as free a flow of information as possible and the development of institutions securing equality of access and influence for all participants . 

  The principle of equal concern and respect would also entail an obligation for those in authority to provide those affected by a decision with reasons for it and appropriate institutional mechanisms for challenging it . 

  The principle of equal concern and respect thus appears to offer a promising theoretical foundation for the parallel development of a participatory form of democracy and the generation of a public-law theory of adjudication . 

  Assuming that Dworkin's rights thesis is capable of being modified along the lines proposed , is it possible to identify any strategies -- long-term , medium-range and short-term strategies -- which could be expected to contribute toward the realisation of an expanded right of equal concern and respect ? 

  STRATEGIES FOR THE REALISATION OF A RIGHT TO EQUAL CONCERN AND RESPECT 

  The complete attainment of either objective would clearly require a fundamental transformation of our entire institutional order . 

  New mechanisms would need to be fashioned in order to assert political and judicial control over the very extensive citadels of private power , on the one hand , and the growing accretion of central government authority on the other . 

  It is in this context that proposals emerging from the Critical Legal Studies movement in the USA are of considerable interest , and in particular Roberto Unger's conception of a self-revising institutional structure " that would provide constant occasions to disrupt any fixed structure of power and co-ordination in social life " ( Unger , 1983 ) . 

  He takes as his starting-point the preconceptions of liberal legal and political theory , and suggests that they be pushed to their logical conclusion to fashion a programme for the reconstruction of the state and the rest of the large-scale institutional structure of society . 

  Chief among these liberal preconceptions is a belief in the liberating effect produced by a weakening of social divisions and hierarchies in society . 

  Thus the ideal aim of any system of rights should be to try to prevent social divisions and hierarchies from becoming insulated against the ordinarily available forms of challenge . 

  Hence he envisages that for every sphere of public- or private-sector activity there should be established some arena of potentially destabilising and broadly-based conflict over the use of that power . 

  Perhaps the most novel aspect of this proposal is its recognition of a category of destabilisation rights , to be enforced by ambitious forms of injunctive relief , which would afford an opportunity for individuals and interests to challenge and disrupt established institutions or forms of social practice which had achieved immunity from conventional legal and political measures of control . 

  Rather more modestly , but perhaps more realistically , some British public lawyers are now also beginning to explore alternative institutional forms to the traditional English representative model of politics , with a view to involving broader constituencies in the decision-making process ( Lewis and Harden , 1982 ) . 

  One of the devices thought to have the best potential for ensuring participation in policy-making is the American administrative law initiative of " hybrid rule-making " . 

  This has the advantage over our conventional representative institutions of being based on a new model of decision-making , one which seeks to ensure adequate consideration of all competing interests , including even poorly organised ones . 

  Regulatory agencies in America have been required , as a result , not just to involve others in the decision-making process but to take a " hard look " at all the relevant issues and alternatives , including abandoning a project , to give reasons for decisions and to make continuous disclosure of the facts and assumptions which it relies on in promulgating a rule . 

  Meanwhile in Britain one encouraging development at local level is an increasing willingness to engage in policy-planning exercises , involving the general public , on the part of participation-minded local authorities such as Sheffield MDC , in its pursuit of alternative strategies to combat the recession and the centripetal tendencies of central government . 

  Finally , are there any short-term strategies which may be capable of being pursued within the context of our existing institutional arrangements ? 

  If law is to be used as " an instrument for casting an alternative political vote by exposing the decision making process to contending views of public necessity " ( Lewis and Harden , 1982 , p. 68 ) , the most obvious way in which such an aim might be pursued is through the development of a test case strategy . 

  Similar tactics have after all been deployed in the USA in respect of civil libertarian , social welfare and environmental issues , and more recently in Britain as part of an attempt to improve the position of recipients of state welfare benefits and other disadvantaged groups ( Prosser , 1983 ; Scheingold , 1974 ) . 

  In this concluding section I would like to consider , specifically in relation to the peace-tax issue , what the prospects of such a strategy might be , in the light of experience gained elsewhere in these other fields . 

  It might be as well to differentiate at the outset between the direct and the indirect effects which test-case litigation might be expected to achieve in promoting a change in the law on tax diversion . 

  First , as far as direct effects are concerned , the most obvious way in which litigation might be used to secure a change in the law is to challenge the interpretation by the courts of a particular point of substantive law . 

  One method which has previously been tried , albeit unsuccessfully , seeks to invoke principles of international law that would allegedly relieve taxpayers from their liability to pay tax on the ground that their assessments are rendered invalid by the unlawful purposes to which the taxes levied are to be applied . 

  This international law argument was originally tested in the well-known case of Cheney v. 

  Conn which until recently was the only British case in which a superior court had been asked to rule on the validity of tax assessments in the light of the purpose to which some of the tax-revenue was to be applied . 

  Mr Cheney refused to pay his income tax on the ground that part of it would be used to build nuclear weapons for use in circumstances which would be in breach of the Geneva Convention Act 1957 , and that this illegal purpose rendered his tax demand invalid . 

  The argument was rejected , in part , because the provisions of the Geneva Convention had not been fully incorporated into English law , despite being ratified . 

  All the 1957 Act had done was to create certain criminal offences , none of which were of any direct assistance to the taxpayer because they were not themselves in direct conflict with the Finance Act 1964 . 

  This decision , and its reasoning , is still being relied on in the growing number of tax-diversion cases that are currently coming before the inferior courts in England and Scotland , and it has most recently been affirmed as decisive by the High Court once more , in Boulton v. 

  Oestreicher . 

  s It had been argued , on Canon Oestreicher's behalf that Cheney v. 

  Conn was distinguishable because it was decided before the Genocide Act 1969 had been passed , and that the latter made a critical difference . 

  Although this argument was also rejected the somewhat superficial reasoning employed by the court raises the question whether a further appeal to the Court of Appeal may be worth considering . 

  For the judge suggested that the legal effect of the Genocide Act and that of the Geneva Conventions Act were indistinguishable for all relevant purposes , since neither fully incorporated the respective Convention into English law but merely created new criminal offences to give effect to that convention . 

  In respect of the Genocide Act , the judge said , it created criminal offences described in the Genocide Convention that were not previously criminal . 

  While this is true as regards the specific wording of the offence of genocide , it was pointed out in the parliamentary debate relating to the Genocide Bill that almost all the offences included in the Convention were in fact already offences under English law . 

  This was certainly not the case in respect of the Geneva Conventions Act where the offences were newly created solely to give effect to the Convention , and were described as being hardly applicable to the case at all . 

  However it is still not apparent that there is a direct conflict between the provisions of the Genocide Act , and those of the Finance Act , which merely authorises the levying of taxes . 

  In any event the latter , being subsequent , would impliedly repeal , and so prevail over , any provisions in the earlier Act with which it was not consistent . 

  Notwithstanding the possible ground for distinguishing between the two cases , therefore , there remains a fundamental doubt as to just how much policy innovation can reasonably be expected from the British judiciary especially in such a politically sensitive area as defence policy . 

  Certainly , previous judicial pronouncements in such cases as Chandler v. 

  DPP , and Cheney v. 

  Conn afford little ground for optimism on this score . 

  In any event , even a successful challenge of the courts' interpretation of the effects of Britain's obligations under international law would be of somewhat limited value . 

  For any effective right of tax-diversion would require legislation to set up a Peace Tax Fund ; to prescribe the uses to which tax resources diverted into the fund might be put ; and to authorise the Inland Revenue Commissioners to take into account a person's conscientious beliefs in determining which account that person's taxes should be paid into . 

  Moreover , as Scheingold ( Scheingold , 1974 , p. 95 ) has somewhat bitterly commented , in the light of his experience with American civil rights test cases , even judicially acknowledged rights should still be treated as contingent resources and not accomplished social facts . 

  And that was true in respect of even such momentous rights as the right to desegregated schooling -- established in Brown v. 

  Education Board of Topeca , one of the most famous test cases of all time . 

  He was surely right to caution that the declaration of a right by a court is perhaps best viewed as the beginning of a political process in which power relationships loom large and immediate . 

  For , " Two decades after the Brown decision " he wrote in 1974 " we are still struggling inconclusively with school desegregation " . 

  Rights , in other words , should not be seen as ends in themselves . 

  Furthermore , as Tony Prosser has recently pointed out with reference to the Child Poverty Action Group's ( CFAG's ) social welfare test cases , there is always the danger that " successful test cases which threaten established policy , especially by increasing expenditure , will meet with quick nullification by legislative or administrative action " ( Prosser , 1983 , p. 74 ) . 

  As far as the direct effects of test-case litigation are concerned , therefore , experience both here and in the USA suggests that it would be unwise to look to the courts alone to secure a right of tax-diversion . 

  That does not mean , however , that legal challenge is unimportant as part of a broader political strategy canvassing for change , only that the indirect effects of test cases may be more significant than any direct changes in the law brought about by them . 

  Among the most important of these indirect effects is the role which test cases can play in politicising issues by forcing them onto the political agenda and once there in keeping them alive . 

  Two tactics which might be worth considering with this aim in mind are the use of test cases first as policy-changing devices and second as political catalysts . 

  A policy-changing strategy involves the use of other institutions and techniques , apart from the domestic courts , in the hope of securing a change in the law or policy , or at least of putting pressure on policy-makers to bring about such a change . 

  The most obvious way of doing this would be by seeking to invoke the protection afforded to freedom of conscience under Article 9 of the European Convention of Human Rights . 

  However , the prospect that such a strategy might succeed appeared somewhat remote from the outset given the rather equivocal commitment to freedom of conscience under the convention as a whole ( not least of which is its failure to incorporate a right of conscientious objection to compulsory military service ( Dignan , 1983 ) ) . 

  Moreover , the preliminary decisions of the Commission as to the admissibility of two cases submitted by British tax-protesters appear to have dealt a fatal blow to any remaining hopes that the European Court of Human Rights might be used as an additional forum in which to exert pressure for a change in the existing law and policy regarding tax diversion . 

  For the Commission did not accept ( nor , it must be said , did it appear directly to address ) the proposition that tax diversion is a necessary manifestation of a person's political beliefs , as opposed to a practice that is merely consistent with , and motivated by such a belief . 

  As such , tax diversion was not entitled to protection as a manifestation nf a philosophical belief in practice in the way that other acts , more intimately linked to the belief ( for example , acts of worship ) would be . 

  Since there is no appeal against the opinion of the Commission , these findings do appear to exhaust the scope of this particular policy-changing strategy for the time being , though given the interest shown by the parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in extending the right of conscientious objection , a change in the provisions of the Convention itself can not be entirely ruled out . 

  Finally , and perhaps most significantly of all , test cases may be used as political catalysts " to spark off a process in the political arena , ( Prosser , 1983 , p. 5 ) in the hope of extending the rights of those concerned . 

  Indeed commentators on test-case litigation in both the UK and the USA appear agreed that the main value of test-case litigation derives from its contribution to the broader process of political mobilisation rather than from any direct change in the law which it might be expected to bring about . 

  The useful , though subordinate , role which litigation might be expected to play in this mobilisation process extends to publicising areas of law such as tax diversion which stand in need of reform , and so helping to politicise the issues and raise the general level of political awareness on the part of peace protesters and the general public alike . 

  Litigation may also have a valuable contribution to make in activating and mobilising a constituency of common interests , thereby helping to establish and strengthen a collective political identity on the part of otherwise somewhat amorphous interests groups such as environmentalists , or peace campaigners , among whom there may be less cohesion and common identity than is the case with other campaigning groups . 

  But if political mobilisation is seen as the key strategy with litigation as a contributory tactic , as Scheingold suggests , then it follows that legal challenge should not be conducted in isolation from other forms of pressure-group activity . 

  That is , test cases , to be effective , must be accompanied by intensive lobbying and such cases , may in themselves provide valuable resources for use in lobbying , a case in point , being the sympathetic comment made by the judge in Bolton v. 

  Oestreicher in respect of the " serious arguments which are worth of consideration ... which have been and ought to be addressed to Parliament " . 

  In the light of these remarks , the following very tentative conclusions may perhaps be advanced . 

  The switch of tactics on the part of the war-tax resistance movement which can be dated back to 1977 is potentially of great significance because it provided the conditions in which a broad-based political campaign may be mounted , calling for a statutory right of tax diversion and relying on litigation as an auxiliary and subordinate weapon , instead of depending exclusively on litigation to try to bring about a change in the law directly . 

  But the peace-tax issue is itself only one small part of a much broader campaign involving peace environmental and community groups to try to make our somewhat outmoded decision-making structures more responsive to the needs of wider constituencies than those which for the most part are represented by our conventional political institutions . 

  On a theoretical level it would seem desirable that any revised theory of public law or democracy should also be capable of satisfactorily addressing these broader long-term issues as well as the more immediate concerns of the peace-tax campaigners . 

  A modified theory of rights seems to be promising on this score . 

  On a practical and tactical level it suggests that groups with common aspirations should seek to engage in broadly-based political alliances to further their shared interests , through a combination of lobbying , pressure-group activity and litigation . 

  Of particular relevance here is the common interest which the peace-tax movement may have with the more progressive local authorities who are opposed to the new government civil defence regulations . 

  For although these have been substantially revised there is still a considerable element of compulsion involved in the duty to train and exercise staff , and an absence of any conscientious objection clause analogous to that of which combatants may avail themselves . 

  Finally , however , it has to be conceded that it is one thing to articulate a right of tax-diversion or participation in policy-making , and quite another to secure legal recognition for such a right . 

  The latter will depend on the outcome of sustained political campaigning in which litigation may be expected to play an important though auxiliary role . 

  Much will depend on the overall political climate and whether this can be changed sufficiently by a combined strategy conducted over a sustained period . 

  The outlook , particularly since the general election which saw the defeat of two of the Peace-Tax Campaign's principal supporters in parliament -- Mr A Lyon and Mr F Hooley -- is not too encouraging . 

  But perhaps like Tony Prosser I might be allowed to conclude by citing the words of Edward Sparer when assessing the future after the failure of the US sequential test-case strategy : 

  The Young Ornithologist 

  I still do not really know what it was about birds of prey that fascinated me . 

  Somehow , even at the age of five when I made my first visits to Colchester Zoo , I felt they stood out from other birds . 

  It must have been their sheer size and the impression of power you got even when they were standing still . 

  A squawking , dayglo-coloured parrot was no match for , say , the majestic eagle owl with its camouflage plumage , massive wings and awesome beak and talons . 

  I was also taken by the way the cute-looking tawny owls just sat there on their perches , looking at each other with one eye open . 

  I know now that owls are not at all like living cuddly toys , but at the time I wanted to reach out and cuddle them . 

  Even more than their magnificent appearance , I think it was the movement of the birds that captivated me -- their ability to fly fast or , in the case of the owls , slow and in absolute silence , and pinpoint their prey with breathtaking accuracy , even in total darkness . 

  There were lanner falcons and peregrines in the zoo , I remember , and I still find their perfect manoeuvrability in the air almost unbelievable . 

  Simply by shuffling their tail feathers like a pack of cards , they can hang in the air or spin round at breakneck speed . 

  Years later , at a falconry centre , I once saw a falcon miss the bait it was supposed to pick up , fly past , come to a sudden standstill in mid-air , turn 180 degrees and zoom down again . 

  No fighter aircraft could do it . 

  After all these years of watching birds of prey in flight , I still find that they will do something completely unexpected . 

  You just do not get the same sort of thrill from watching blackbirds . 

  The life of a five-year-old ornithologist did not always run smoothly . 

  One day I found a dead blackbird , already in an advanced state of decay , in the road outside my house . 

  Reverently I picked it up and buried it in our back garden -- three feet down seemed to me an appropriate depth . 

  A few days later , a lady who lived across the road made the mistake of asking me what sort of bird it had been . 

  I promptly dug the poor bird up and presented it to her . 

  She was not amused . 

  I was always giving secret funerals to dead birds . 

  There must have been dozens of them in our back garden by the time I was seven , though my parents had no idea they were living next to a bird cemetery . 

  Even the compost heap had corpses in it . 

  Osprey 

  We used to live about a hundred yards away from the main park in Colchester . 

  The park had a few fairly large hills ( or so it seemed to me at the time ) topped by a castle , a lake with a river running through it and quite a few trees scattered here and there . 

  It was not exactly a naturalist's dream , but to me it was the Great Outdoors , an unexplored wilderness . 

  Walking along the riverbank or lakeside , I could see a variety of waterfowl , such as moorhens , seagulls and ducks ; up in the trees were virtually the entire crow family -- jays , rooks and jackdaws -- as well as blackbirds , thrushes , finches , all the everyday birds . 

  And up on the hill , the castle was home to the pigeons , who would retire there to roost after a busy day's scavenging in the town centre . 

  Whenever my mother had to go shopping I'd contrive to make her walk to the high street via the park . 

  All the way I'd be talking to myself in my head , saying , " Um , yes , that's a so-and-so , " practising my identification skills . 

  My grandmother is a keen birdwatcher and she'd already introduced me to a lot of the different birds that visited her bird-table , telling me what they ate and showing me their nests and explaining how they were made and what they were made of . 

  As I got older , about seven or eight , I was allowed to go to the park on my own . 

  Now , instead of simply cataloguing the different species in my head , I could start to explore their habitat and study their behaviour . 

  I was in my element . 

  There was a sort of bird sanctuary on an island in the middle of the lake and I'd spend a lot of my time watching the comings and goings of the inhabitants . 

  I just never got bored . 

  But fascinated as I was by these aquatic birds , I longed to see the falcons and owls I'd seen at the zoo flying free , and this is a rare occurrence . 

  In fact , the only bird of prey I ever saw hovering over the park was a kestrel . 

  When I did spot the kestrel , I would sit down on the ground or the nearest bench and gaze in amazement . 

  At this time I was at a loss to understand how it managed to hover for so long in the same place . 

  I would sit there for ages trying to figure out how it accomplished this . 

  I did not know anything about the way some birds use warm air currents to help their flight . 

  One theory I came up with was that the down beat of its wings pushed it upwards and the up beat pushed it downwards and the two cancelled each other out so that the kestrel stayed where it was . 

  Completely inaccurate , of course , but not bad for a seven-year-old . 

  BELOW Dawn and me in St Nectan's Glen . 

  A path through a mile of woodland leads to the waterfall . 

  It's a beautiful place for any nature lover , and I did a lot of my early birdwatching in Cornwall here . 

  RIGHT A clump of woodland on a farm near where I live . 

  Tawny owls live here -- the trees form a corridor across the farm where they can hunt without venturing out on to open land . 

  The overgrown grass , hedges and piles of wood are a haven for mice , which are among the tawnies' favourite food . 

  ABOVE LEFT This is a tawny owl that was found injured by the side of the road and brought to my neighbour , Maureen Edwards , for help . 

  We called her Rusty , because of her colour . 

  She's very easy to handle and not fierce at all , so she had obviously been hand-reared . 

  She might have been released by someone who does not like seeing birds in cages , or by the breeder -- perhaps he did not have a licence to keep her and somebody reported him . 

  Anyway , she's far too tame to survive in the wild , so she lives quite happily at Maureen's . 

  LEFT Rusty and another tawny owl , Herbert . 

  As you can see , he's much greyer than she is , which is rare -- both sexes of tawnies are usually the same colour . 

  Herbert came from a breeder who had gone on holiday without realising his owl had laid eggs . 

  By the time he came back , Herbert was too big to be ringed , so it would have been illegal to sell him . 

  He came to live at Maureen's , too , and she may well breed him with Rusty -- if we're right in thinking Rusty is a female , that is ! 

  ABOVE As time went by , more and more people started bringing me injured birds to look after . 

  This barn owl's broken wing had been set by a vet who kept it in a cat cage for a week or two so that it could rest . 

  The bird has become very unfit , and the damaged wing is shorter than the other , so I've been working on moving it in the way the bird would move it in flight , to stretch it . 

  At the moment , it does not seem to be working and it may be that we can never return this owl to the wild -- it certainly would not survive as it is . 

  But it will still be useful for breeding . 

  LEFT Ruffling up the feathers to make yourself look bigger is a common defensive measure in a lot of birds . 

  That's what this juvenile male barn owl is doing ; Barny turned out to have more violent tendencies than this ! ( ) 

  BELOW LEFT A pair of barn owls with young . 

  The chicks are only a few days old , but these parents are obviously more relaxed with them than the Barnys were with any of their offspring . ( ) 

  BELOW These chicks hatched two days apart -- when this picture was taken they were 29 , 27 and 25 days old , but you can see the heart-shaped facial disc emerging clearly from the ball of fluff . 

  Dawn was younger than this when I first had her . ( ) 

  It's difficult to imaging a newborn chick turning into a beautiful bird like the barn owl . 

  This one is about three hours old and still lying in the foetal position in which it emerged from the egg . 

  As I sat looking up at this magnificent bird , especially on a fine day , I used to feel a terrific urge to see a bird of prey flying to a lure , which I'd read about in my falconry books . 

  I think my desire to train a bird of my own must have been born right there in Colchester Park . 

  I used to wonder just what the kestrel was looking at , what it was thinking , and I'd imagine how wonderful it must be to be suspended in mid-air , looking down on the Earth as it was . 

  Given the chance , I would have stayed watching or followed the kestrel around the park all day , but if I was on a shopping sortie with my mother , she was always in an incredible hurry , so that was not possible . 

  When I did manage to follow it , I was stunned by the fact that it could gain such a good speed although it was flying without putting any apparent effort into beating its wings . 

  Then it would presumably spot some potential prey and come to a standstill in mid-air as if it had brakes . 

  One thing I distinctly remember about watching that kestrel hover happened on a clear blue day when I'd managed to position myself practically underneath the bird . 

  I noticed that its wing and tail feathers faded out gradually as they got further away from its body , so that the sun was peering through near the tips as the feathers became thinner . 

  I always used to relate this to the ghostly effect you sometimes get round a figure in a horror film . 

  Watching the kestrel was a great experience , but life was still very frustrating for me because my mother understandably would not let me wander very far afield , and I was not going to see my first real live wild owl in Colchester Park ! 

  Tantalisingly , at night , I might hear the plaintive hoot of a tawny owl somewhere in the trees , beyond my little world . 

  I was already enough of an expert to recognise it -- people had begun to give me books about birds of prey , so the first time I heard this sorrowful sound I searched through my books until I found out what it was . 

  In fact , tawnies are the only British owls that hoot -- some of them screech , but little owls whistle and barn owls make a terrible snorting sound like an old man snoring . 

  They can also produce a loud hissing , screeching noise . 

  I kept reading and my knowledge kept growing , but I still wanted to see an owl's nest and experience the thrill of actually seeing one in flight , in the feather , so to speak . 

  The birds in the aviary at the zoo were enchanting , but I wanted more . 

  Besides , my frequent visits there were becoming expensive . 

  It was around this time that I first discovered the darker side of ornithology -- the effect of man on the environment . 

  I know now that every park , meadow , lake , river , moor and garden in Britain is in need of conservation , as much as any game reserve in Africa or rain forest in South America . 

  But it was in Colchester Park that I had my first lesson in conservation in microcosm , if you like . 

  The problem with the lake in the park was that local fishermen wanted to fish in it . 

  And when they fished there they would inevitably lose tackle , and it would stay in the lake forming a hazard for the ducks and swans . 

  On a number of occasions I saw birds entangled in these " snares " . 

  I'd often see birds with gut or wire wrapped around their necks or wings , or looking ill because , as I discovered later , they'd swallowed lead shot which the anglers used to weight their lines . 

  There were even birds with hooks embedded in their webbed feet . 

  Although I knew it was not my fault , I always felt frustrated because I could not do anything to help . 

  I also felt strangely guilty , almost ashamed . 

  I was so close to these birds , they were like friends , and it seemed I had a personal responsibility towards them . 

  Obviously this sense of guilt , this idea that I had betrayed a friendship , spurred me on when I got older , not only to study birds but also actively to promote their well-being and do what I could to prevent their numbers from dwindling . 

  But at the time I was just hurt that I could not wade out into the lake and save them . 

  Of course I was far too small , and they'd have swum away from me in fright anyway , but that did not stop me trying on occasion . 

  I can still recall one particularly sad instance . 

  When I went over to the lake one day I spotted a seagull in distress . 

  It was just floating on the surface , not wading or swimming , but unnaturally afloat ; so exhausted it could not even sit upright . 

  Its head bowed , its wings half open and useless , it was very , very wearily steering itself round and round in hopeless circles . 

  I could tell it was virtually on the point of death . 

  My heart cried out to it , but when I approached it , it summoned up the last dregs of its strength and paddled frantically away to the middle of the lake , where I had been instructed never to go . 

  Even from the shore I could tell that it had half strangled itself in a length of fishing line ; it was also hooked up in several places and carrying some heavy land weights . 

  Soon I , too , was very distressed , but I knew that it was going to be dead within a few hours , and I was helpless . 

  I did not know about the RSPB or the RSPCA or any other caring agency I could have turned to for assistance . 

  At my tender age , I could only look on . 

  The next morning I was back in the park . 

  I walked around the lake three times , looking for the gull . 

  On the third circuit , I found it , lying dead in a reed bed . 

  I had a fishing net with me and carefully fished it out . 

  When I had a close look at it , I saw that the inside of its mouth , which should have been pink , was very pale and frothing . 

  The body was still warm . 

  I imagined its tragic , night-long struggle to survive , the suffering it had endured and its final painful death as the sun rose . 

  I felt very angry . 

  As I untangled the fishing tackle , I found over three feet of wire line , two hooks and five weights . 

  It was obvious what had happened . 

  The whole lake was a death trap for birds . 

  And I knew why . 

  Every time an angler casts and curses when he loses his line , I , too , now curse as I think of some wild creature getting enmeshed in the deadly snare he has inadvertently set . 

  Fishing is the most popular outdoor sport in the British Isles , so just think how many weights and hooks and miles of wire and gut are accidentally lost each year off our coasts and in our lakes and rivers . 

  And imagine what the death toll of wildlife must be . 

  Fortunately , fishing is banned in the lake in Colchester Park now , and restricted to a few responsible permit-holders along the river . 

  These are , at least , moves in the right direction . 

  The ducks that lived on the island in that lake did not restrict their activities to the park . 

  Mallards , coots and moorhens could often be seen and heard waddling about the housing estate where I lived or sometimes even boldly marching up the high street . 

  There were platoons of them on a sort of scrounging patrol , begging food from gardeners or shoppers . 

  Often these sorties would result in a skirmish with the pigeons , who presumably saw the ducks as invaders on their patch . 

  Greatly outnumbered , the ducks would abandon their foraging mission and beat a hasty retreat to their island stronghold at the slightest sign of trouble . 

  But we always encouraged them at our house by putting out tempting bowlfuls of soggy bread and milk . 

  After a while the ducks got so confident that they'd come right into our garden and eventually into the house itself . 

  It's funny to look back and think how much my mum enjoyed having the ducks around -- she encouraged them as much as I did . 

  But later she developed an allergy to feathers , and that made it very difficult for her when I wanted to keep birds in the house ! 

  We'd been feeding " our " ducks for about three months when one day , much to my disappointment , they mysteriously disappeared . 

  We kept putting food out , though , and after about a month they all suddenly returned , with hordes of hungry ducklings in tow . 

  The new mothers were ravenous and it was easy to coax them back into the house . 

  I decided to try an experiment . 

  I wanted to see if our guests could be persuaded to climb the stairs , so I laid a trail of bread from the bowl in the hall up to my bedroom . 

  And I waited . 

  I had a long wait . 

  Webbed feet were not designed for mountaineering , but after a few weeks the ducks had devised a method of hopping up the stairs one at a time , eating every morsel of bread along the way , until finally they were actually in my bedroom . 

  I was thrilled . 

  It was the first time I had ever trained a bird to do something I wanted it to do . 

  They would never stay in my bedroom very long , but you can imagine my excitement each lunchtime as I watched them arrive in the garden , enter the house and quack their way up to me , as regular as clockwork . 

  I must have been about six or seven at this time . 

  Little did I know then that one day I would be training a fully grown bird of prey to hunt . 

  From my bedroom I had quite a clear view of the lake between two neighbouring houses . 

  I did not own a pair of binoculars , so I could not observe the birds as closely as I'd have wished , but I had something much closer to watch . 

  In summer the estate became the home of colonies of house martins and swallows . 

  Every house seemed to have at least one , sometimes several , of the distinctive mud-baked nests under its eaves . 

  We used to have a family of martins nesting directly over our front porch , just under my bedroom window . 

  They'd come back every year and I learned a lot about their breeding habits , watching both parents bring food back to the chicks . 

  I was intrigued to find that they might have two or even three broods in a summer , and that the elder chicks sometimes stayed around in the nest after the younger ones had hatched . 

  Obviously I enjoyed having the opportunity to watch any nesting birds so close at hand -- I could reach out of my bedroom window , when Mum was not around , and feel right inside the nest -- but many of the neighbours looked on the house martins as pests who infested their property and made a mess . 

  Even my father was not too pleased about continually having to clean his porch roof , which our residents had covered in droppings and other nest debris . 

  Eventually he decided to give them their marching orders , and one spring , just before the birds were due to arrive , he nailed wire netting and a large dustbin bag along the eaves to stop them building their nests in the usual place . 

  This did the trick , of course , but the birds simply moved in next door , which did not make the neighbours too happy . 

  I was sad to see the martins go , even though they had often been very noisy at night and kept me awake . 

  Perhaps they are pests to a lot of people , but we did not see too many flies around our estate during the hot summer , so they had their uses . 

  By this time I was a serious amateur naturalist with a special interest in anything in feathers . 

  I did not completely exclude other creatures , though . 

  My second favourite place at the zoo was the Reptile House , and I've had various sorts of reptiles as pets . 

  Now I use their old vivarium to rear owls in . 

  But birds were my great passion . 

  I studied nests , eggs , flight , breeding habits , feeding habits , anything and everything to do with birds . 

  I had also begun to keep a notebook in which I wrote details of my observations , complete with explanatory drawings . 

  I'd been drawing since I was tiny -- my grandfather is a very good artist , although he specialises in landscapes , and he'd helped me enormously from the beginning . 

  I used to sit and watch him for hours , painstakingly working on a painting , and , following his example , I would push myself harder and harder to make my own drawings better . 

  The drawing and the birdwatching had grown up as complementary interests from a very young age . 

  I find it hard to believe that my paintings now sell in London and many other places ! 

  Not long after I'd started the notebook , I became the proud owner of my first pair of binoculars . 

  I'd spotted them in a second-hand shop and immediately began saving feverishly to make them mine before anyone else got their hands on them . 

  At last I had five pounds -- but when my father and I went to buy them we were told that they cost fifteen pounds , a considerable sum of money to an eight-year-old , and way beyond my means . 

  Good old Dad , however , did the decent thing and the binoculars were mine . 

  They were excellent binoculars , too , and I had hours and hours of pleasure with them . 

  I've still got them , in fact . 

  There was no stopping me now . 

  I was a fully equipped birdwatcher , very inexperienced , perhaps , but with a one-track mind . 

  My birdwatching vigils lasted for hours : spying on swallows and swifts as they flitted over the lake , scooping up water or snapping up insects . 

  When I was not in the park , I was cataloguing the host of visitors to the weeping willow tree on our front lawn -- just about everything that would sit in a tree came there , mostly blackbirds , sparrows and pigeons , but the ducks loved the shelter of the drooping branches . 

  I became a total bird addict . 

  But there was still no sign of the elusive owl , and now I had another quest , too . 

  One particular bird was driving me crazy . 

  I knew what it looked like , I knew what it sounded like , I had read all about it . 

  Its ringing , double-noted call haunted me night after night -- a call the least experienced birdwatcher would recognise instantly . 

  But I just could not spot one . 

  The bird in question was the common cuckoo . 

  I was learning the most important attribute of any budding ornithologist -- patience . 

  It was to be seven long years before I actually clapped eyes on a cuckoo in the wild -- on a school camping holiday to the Scilly Isles , of all places -- but that was in another life and another land , far from my roots in Colchester Park and Colchester Zoo . 

  Because in 1982 , when I was nine years old , my father's work brought us to North Cornwall , where the landscapes are among the most magical on Earth and the legend of King Arthur still burns . 

  Cornwall 

  At first Cornwall was a bit strange to me . 

  We'd made three or four visits to the area to look around before we finally moved down , but I had no real idea what was happening . 

  It was all just a big adventure . 

  Then one day I found myself sitting in a packed car and we were away and moving into a new house in a place called Tintagel . 

  It was during the Easter holidays and the streets were full of holiday-makers -- I would be seeing a lot of them in the future . 

  One thing that I had grasped about the whole business was that we were going to live in a country area where there would be lots of wildlife , and I had heard of King Arthur , of course . 

  What with all the activity associated with moving house , it was two weeks before we got to see Arthur's famous castle . 

  I'd been expecting a great hall with a giant round table , towering turrets , a moat and a drawbridge , but , of course , it turned out to be a ruin . 

  Still , it's a magnificent place , perched on a great rock jutting out into the sea and with commanding views . 

  It was easy to imagine that it might have been Camelot , like in the picture story-books I'd read . 

  But really it was the buzzards and the kestrels circling overhead that caught my eye as we made our way down the coastal path . 

  I'd see both these birds in the zoo , so I was fascinated to see them in the wild . 

  By now I'd read about how exhausting flight could be and how birds of prey used warm air currents -- known as thermals -- to lift them without using up too much energy , and here they were , doing just that over the rocks by Tintagel Castle . 

  They were looking for food , of course , and would suddenly plunge downwards at lightning speed when they spotted something . 

  A kestrel's prey might be something as small as a beetle , and as they tend to hover twenty or thirty feet above the ground , their eyesight and the accuracy of their dive are both awe-inspiring . 

  The day after we first visited the castle , my sister and I were treated to a walk along the cliffs . 

  North Cornwall must have some of the most spectacular scenery in the whole of the British Isles , and the coastline from Morwenstow to Looe consists of wild , towering cliffs that are so rugged many people have lost their lives on them . 

  On a wet winter's day when the sea is at its roughest , the sight of the waves pounding against the bottom of the cliffs , throwing spray up over the top and into the fields , is breathtaking . 

  In the summer , on the other hand , the sea is a beautiful dark blue and the sunlight glistens like tinsel on the surface of the water . 

  Then the cliffs come alive with sea birds gliding effortlessly along the coastline on fishing or scavenging expeditions . 

  They range from the common but splendid gulls to the truly magnificent gannets ; shags and cormorants , which look very much alike and are fabulous divers ; razorbills , which in my view look more like penguins ; guillemots and of course the famous puffin , which lives mainly on some of the many rugged islands just off shore . 

  Another feature of the coast is the number of inlets like the one at Rock , near Padstow . 

  Some of these inlets lead to salt marshes and estuaries which give refuge to many other coastal birds , especially waders . 

  The muddy or sandy beds and long damp grass make ideal habitat for such birds as dunlin , which are mainly seen in winter , and of course a variety of ducks and geese . 

  There are mallards , teals , of which I have seen a few recently in the Camel estuary , always an abundance of moorhens and coots , and here and there the odd tern . 

  I have never seen an avocet in Cornwall , but I am told that this rare and unique bird has been spotted on these marshes . 

  The water itself also has a wealth of life . 

  You will often find starfish in pools on the beach , and there are always plenty of gobies and blennies . 

  The seas are full of mackerel , pollock , dogfish , wrass , conger eels and a variety of flat fish , just to name a few , so the fishing is great . 

  Going inland , you first come across the Cornish farmland . 

  You notice immediately that it is different from other parts of the country , because the roads are very narrow and windy and the hedges well built and in most cases so tall they are impossible to see over . 

  In the summer these hedges come alive with colour and activity . 

  There's an amazing variety of wild flowers , insects , birds and other wildlife . 

  Rabbits and foxes are common enough to be regarded as a nuisance ; there are also hedgehogs , voles , mice and other rodents . 

  Most of the animals that live along the hedgerows unfortunately only come out at night and the best way to see them is in the light of a car's headlamp . 

  My favourite of these creatures is the badger . 

  I spend many evenings with a spotlight just roaming the fields and observing what they and the other animals are doing , and I thoroughly enjoy myself . 

  Because of the rabbits and rodents , some of which do of course appear during the day , there are also large numbers of birds of prey . 

  The most frequently seen in Cornwall is the common buzzard , which flourishes because of the huge rabbit population . 

  Its equivalent among the nocturnal birds is the tawny owl . 

  Although there are not all that many trees in North Cornwall , those that are there , are usually found in large groups , which the tawny owl loves . 

  There are also kestrels , the occasional harrier , and various owls : barn owls are decreasing in number , but if you're lucky you shall also see little owls , short- and long-eared owls -- they're all found in or near woodland . 

  Further inland , you find yourself climbing on to the moors , which are another haven for wildlife . 

  Bleak and lonely they may be , but they are covered with lakes and pools which house frogs , toads , newts , eels and freshwater fish , while on the banks you shall find vermin such as water rats , stoats , weasels and the like . 

  These do occur on the farmland , too , but not in such numbers and they're much more difficult to see there . 

  You can sometimes spot deer on the moors , though they also occur nearer the coast , mainly in the woodland areas but occasionally in the open fields too . 

  Like the coast , the moors are very rugged in places . 

  High peaks are crested with boulders worn smooth by the weather . 

  There's a great variety of bracken , ferns and other plant life . 

  But the real attractions are the fresh air and the breathtaking views . 

  In some places on exceptionally clear days you can almost see from the south to the north coast . 

  For a week or so after we moved to Cornwall , I was free to have a great time exploring my new habitat . 

  But then the dreaded word " school " was mentioned , and I found myself decked out in a strange blue and grey uniform with a new yellow and blue tie and a starched white shirt collar that felt tight and very uncomfortable round my neck . 

  The carefree days of the Easter holidays were over . 

  Any kid will tell you that the worst part of moving house is having to start at a new school where you do not know anyone , and I was scared stiff . 

  I soon discovered that a lot of the local children stuck together and that outsiders were not made very welcome -- even if you come from another part of Cornwall it takes a long time to be accepted . 

  The teachers were very helpful and caring , and for the first few days I thought I was getting on quite well with my new classmates . 

  But I quickly found out that they were just " sussing me out " -- seeing how tough I was -- and when my novelty as a new boy wore off , I was out in the cold . 

  This took the form of teasing , mostly , and one day I was so fed up that I just walked out of school . 

  A teacher came after me but I climbed through a hedge and sat tight for an hour or so . 

  I suppose the problem was that my interest in birds had made me a bit of a loner . 

  I'd spent so much time on my own , sitting watching birds , or reading about them or drawing them , that I did not make many friends , and those I had took second place to the birds . 

  The result was that I was painfully shy . 

  The kids at my new school all went round in little gangs , spoiling for a fight -- nothing serious , just pushing other kids over and jeering at them . 

  Well , I simply was not that type . 

  My sister took a bit of stick at first , too , and although she's two years younger than me and was in a different class , we stuck together at break times and tried to avoid the sneering eyes . 

  But by the end of our first year in Cornwall she'd made a few friends and I was not being bullied so much , so life became a little easier . 

  One of the good things about the school was that it overlooked open countryside , where there were usually buzzards and kestrels flying around . 

  The school was an ideal hunting ground for both these birds . 

  They hovered over the playing fields and even sat on the goal posts . 

  The bit of marshy ground beyond the playing fields was vole country , which was what attracted the kestrels . 

  The surrounding fields were full of rabbits -- the buzzards' favourite food -- and from their perch on the goal posts they could spot a rabbit three or four fields away . 

  From a distance , a buzzard sitting on a post looks just like an extension of that post , because its brown plumage mingles very easily with similarly coloured items . 

  Close up , of course , you notice that its feathers are very different from the colour and texture of the wood . 

  A buzzard's feathers have almost a glossy look to them , and they're more than one shade of brown . 

  If you observe the bird from the front , you shall see that it ranges in hue from the creamy white of the breast and stomach to quite a dark brown with even darker flecks on the neck . 

  When the buzzard is in flight , cream is the main colour you see , and if you have good eyesight and know what you are looking for , it's quite distinctive , even from a distance . 

  Common buzzard 

  Buzzards will eat much smaller prey than rabbits , particularly in the winter when food is scarce . 

  They will go for small birds , insects and even worms -- but then , it's said that there's as much protein in a decent-sized earthworm as in quarter of a pound of beef , so it must be nourishing , if not very appetising by most people's standards ! 

  Watching a buzzard in flight is very similar to watching a glider -- it just seems to float effortlessly . 

  It flaps its wings a few times to lift itself off the ground , then simply rises up , using whatever thermals and air currents it comes across . 

  Every so often it will flap again to give itself a little more power and lift . 

  I also used to compare the buzzard to a kite , being allowed to gain height gradually and seeming to grow smaller and smaller until it went out of control and soared off into the distance with the wind . 

  I always noticed how the pale , flecked breast and dark bands on the brown and white wings faded into each other as the buzzard rose higher and higher . 

  Eventually it was just a dark dot way up in the shy , almost unrecognisable except for the distinctive flight pattern : it would glide round in a circle , then soar off in a straight line , helped along by the wind , and finally resume its circular flight again . 

  As you watch a buzzard quartering the ground , it's easy to think that they are very lazy birds . 

  But I am always reminded of a large bomber aircraft coming in to land , moving very much more slowly than you'd expect for something of its size . 

  The fact that the buzzard's soaring flight looks easy does not make the bird any less powerful . 

  You can tell the buzzard is a soaring bird by its wing shape , which is very much the same as that of an eagle . 

  The wings are very broad and thick at the base and the feathers at the end of the wings are parted like the fingers of a human hand . 

  The tail is also very broad and looks a bit like a Japanese fan when opened out fully . 

  These two distinctive features are , of course , there for a reason : they allow the bird to capture much more air , which gives it a much better pushing force as it gains height . 

  The principle has been borrowed by engineers for the design of the wings of large aircraft . 

  In summer the school air space was invaded by squadrons of swallows with their flashy stunt-flying . 

  Actually , these intricate displays were simply high-speed insect-snapping flights . 

  Swallows were everywhere . 

  They nested under the guttering and I spent many a happy lunch-hour wandering around counting their grenade-shaped nests , made of mud and stuck to the eaves of the school buildings . 

  I always tried to work out how many mating pairs we had . 

  ( Not all the nests were occupied , so this was trickier than it sounds . ) 

  Droppings , feathers and , sadly , dead chicks , littered the school premises . 

  Sometimes I found it impossible to concentrate on my school work as the activities of the bird populations outside kept grabbing my attention . 

  " Is there something interesting out there , Jon ? " a teacher would ask . 

  " Er -- no , Miss . " 

  " Then why do you keep looking out the window ? " 

  Someone would usually answer for me : " Oh , he's watching the birds again , Miss . " 

  At which point everyone would crack up with laughter and I'd slide slowly down in my chair with embarrassment . 

  The teachers soon started to realise that I had this huge fascination for birds . 

  It must have shown up in art lessons first . 

  Whenever I had a sheet of paper in front of me and a paintbrush or pencil in my hand , the result was inevitable . 

  A bird would materialise , crudely drawn at first , but always very detailed . 

  My art was far from perfect in those days ! 

  Thank goodness the teachers encouraged me , and I was allowed to express my passion in countless writing and drawing projects and models . 

  My drawings often ended up on the classroom wall . 

  But they put their foot down when it came to maths and they caught me grappling with the colour scheme of a kestrel . 

  All the painting and drawing I did at Tintagel Primary culminated in my " masterpiece " , of which I was quite proud . 

  It was an enormous poster of various garden birds which I was asked to do for the school office . 

  And there it hung until long after I'd left to go to secondary school in Camelford . 

  Sadly , the last time I saw it , which was some years ago , it had pretty well faded beyond recognition . 

  Perhaps by now they've asked some other budding young artist to do a new painting for that wall . 

  Out of school , of course , I continued my birdwatching just as I had done back in Essex , only now there was much more variety . 

  Whenever I could , I went out , armed with my expensive binoculars , to see what I could find in the fields or to observe the coastal birds -- puffins , with the splendid red , yellow and blue bills which they shed when the mating season is over ; cormorants nesting in colonies on ledges in the cliffs ; screeching gannets and all the members of the gull family . 

  The puffin must be one of the most unusual of all British sea birds and there is something very comical about the way it moves and looks . 

  Its brightly coloured bill and large head make it seem a bit top heavy and the small black tail looks out of place in comparison to the bulky body . 

  The first time i spotted a puffin I thought I was seeing things . 

  Apart from its bill , at a distance it looked very much like an out of place penguin . 

  In flight , its little wings look as if they can barely hold it in the air . 

  I always think it would fit in as well in the Mediterranean as in the North Atlantic , because it has the black and white colouring common among all sorts of species of northern bird , and the brightly coloured bill and feet typical of birds that live in hot countries . 

  The cormorant is a browny black bird with a very distinctive glossy effect on its feathers . 

  from a distance it looks more black than brown and it has a most interesting tail which , when closed , looks like one of the flippers scuba divers wear . 

  It is very tall and can sit as still as a statue . 

  It has a very long neck like a duck , and the front of the body sometimes has a faint purple tinge . 

  Its pointed head has the sort of bill you'd expect to see on a prehistoric bird with a notch at the end like an aircraft , s radar . 

  But beware . 

  As I got older and people used to bring me injured birds to look after , I was always very careful of them and did not approach without the leather glove I wear when working with birds of prey . 

  Cormorants can be pretty nasty with their beaks . 

  I once found an injured one walking along a beach near where I live , and when I picked it up to see what was wrong , I underestimated the length of its beak . 

  It immediately grabbed my nose and twisted it round as it would have done with a fish . 

  My nose started to bleed and my eyes streamed with water . 

  Needless to say , I have not trusted a cormorant near my face since . 

  Two distinctive features of the cormorant are a patch of white feathers where the legs meet the body , and another area of white extending from the rear of one eye under the head to the rear of the other eye . 

  Gannets amaze and impress me every time I see them . 

  I think of them as the sea-bird equivalent of a peregrine or other member of the falcon family . 

  The reason I say this is that they dive just like a peregrine , folding their wings and plummeting like an arrow into the sea to catch their prey . 

  They fly through the air with extraordinary ease and in flight they are very distinctive -- they have very long white wings with black tips and the tail looks more like a pointed piece of feather than a proper tail . 

  When gannets are on the ground , you cannot miss the yellowy orange band of colour on the top of their heads which reaches down the back of their necks , and the unusual blue-grey hue of the beaks and feet . 

  They also have a distinctive blue band round their eyes , which is surrounded by black feathers . 

  The body is mainly white , so that from afar they look just like a large seagull . 

  Young gannets are brown , very much like young seagulls , and have white cheeks . 

  One day when I was out in the fields , I even spotted a peregrine falcon high up on one of its hunting trips . 

  In flight these birds are spectacular to watch . 

  This one just hung there like a kite on an invisible string and then fell on its prey like a stone , somewhere in another field . 

  The victim might have been a crow , a jackdaw , a pigeon , even a pheasant , but it would not have stood much chance against the peregrine's talons . 

  As peregrines have been known to dive at a speed of 180 miles an hour , they hit their prey with such force that they often break its neck , and sometimes even break the head clean off . 

  The adult male peregrine is a very distinctive bluey black in colour when seen from the rear . 

  The front is even more striking -- white with very strong black bands from side to side , becoming larger and thicker the further down the body they are . 

  The beak has a characteristic yellow band , and there is a black band progressing downwards from the eyes . 

  Their feet are also bright yellow and they have very large toes , each ending in a black talon . 

  The wings are pointed , light in colour on the underside , like the chest , with a gradually curving pattern of specks . 

  The tail is short and blunt-looking . 

  The female peregrine is slightly larger than the male , more brown than black , and the bands across the chest are not as distinctive . 

  The young are brown and lack the bands altogether , having white plumage with dark specks on the chest . 

  You can see that ours is a bit of a mad house . 

  Me with Dawn , Mum with Jasper the cat , my sister Leanne with Zara the kestrel , now deceased , and little sister Annamarie with Barry the guinea pig . 

  Sabre the dog was old and ill when this picture was taken , and sadly had to be put to sleep shortly afterwards 

  BELOW Dawn and I used to watch a lot of television while I was training her , but she was always easily distracted -- she's obviously much more interested in what the photographer is doing . 

  Now that her training is complete , she does not sit on my fist so much , but prefers the back of the chair or the top of the door . 

  I do not know what she thinks about television , but she seems to enjoy the music on the car radio whenever we're going to lectures . 

  RIGHT This is the main stem of the wing feathers where the two parts of the wing overlap . 

  Underneath are the primary feathers which are harsher and used for steering ; the secondary feathers are on the top and used for catching the wind and for balance . 

  BELOW RIGHT A close up of Dawn's very soft head and neck feathers . 

  The softness is a characteristic of owl feathers and makes for silent flight . 

  LEFT Dawn eating a chick , which when she was in training would be all she had to eat all day . 

  If I am not keeping her appetite sharp for flying , she has two or three chicks a day . 

  She can easily swallow one in one go , so mealtimes do not last long . 

  ABOVE This sort of bloated , eyes half-shut look is typical of Dawn after she's eaten . 

  She makes a sort of crackling noise which I've never been able to explain : it may be contentment -- or perhaps she's asking for more . 

  BELOW Dawn just coming off her perch , her wings on the downbeat , cupping the air to give her lift . 

  RIGHT Dawn " throwing up " -- yes , it really is called that -- as she's about to land on my glove . 

  Her talons are thrust forward ready to grab the food . 

  The characteristic hunting pose of an owl quartering the ground or flying fast and low towards something it's spotted below it . 

  During the war , peregrines were declared a pest because they used to attack carrier pigeons and prevent messages reaching their destination . 

  This led to a decline in numbers , but they are recovering , although the racing pigeon fraternity complain about them now ! 

  In addition to their amazing dives , peregrines are capable of long , sustained flight . 

  I've seen one at a display of falconry trying to " creep up " on a pigeon . 

  This is not an easy thing to do , as you can imagine , and the pigeon took off . 

  The peregrine chased it for six miles , and even then the pigeon did not give in . 

  This would not always be the case -- the pigeon might be able to take cover and elude the peregrine , but the peregrine might equally decide that it was not worth the chase . 

  It cannot afford to expend too much energy on a prey it's not certain of catching . 

  On the other hand , if the peregrine was flying high up , above the pigeon , it would have the advantage , because it could swoop down and break the pigeon's neck . 

  Another favourite haunt of mine was up at my nan's place , St Nectan's Glen , near Trethevy , a couple of miles from our house . 

  it's very beautiful in the glen , like something out of a fairy tale , and there's a picturesque waterfall which is a major tourist attraction . 

  Here I would see many interesting birds , but the most attractive to me was the dipper . 

  A pair was nesting right next to the waterfall one year , practically underneath it . 

  Their nest was a bit like an overgrown wren's nest -- a pile of moss fixed on to the rock face . 

  The dippers are browny-black in colour with striking , snowy white breasts ; they're about the size of a well-fed blackbird , but far more enjoyable to watch . 

  They are incredible divers , making perfect plunges into the foaming waters where the fall churns them up and disturbs aquatic life for them to feed on . 

  They stay submerged for ages , until you begin to think you've only imagined you saw one go in -- and then they pop up with a beakful of food . 

  I've never measured how long they stay under water , but tourists walking along the path to the waterfall often report that they think a bird is drowning ! 

  Towards evening the owls start up with their eerie hooting and screeching . 

  The glen is a sort of spooky , secret place , said to be haunted by monks walking the Pilgrim Trail . 

  I did not venture further in to find the owls in case I bumped into a Brother . 

  When I stayed overnight at my nan's , which I often did , I actually slept in a room next to where the old monastery used to be . 

  As you can imagine , I did not do much sleeping the first two or three nights I was there . 

  Every time I heard the wind rustling in the bushes or rattling the slates I'd duck down under the covers , thinking of hooded ghosts stomping through the garden -- or through the wall . 

  And owls provided just the right sound effects for the horror-film atmosphere . 

  Kingfisher 

  Owls call for a number of reasons . 

  They may be trying to attract a mate , mapping out their territory , warning other males off . 

  They are the only nocturnal birds of prey , and they stay awake most of the night . 

  Even if they are half asleep , they will still be alert and ready to respond to any danger . 

  Their eyesight is remarkable in poor light , so they hunt mostly at dawn and dusk . 

  They sleep during the day , and you will sometimes see flocks of little birds mobbing a sleeping owl in broad daylight . 

  These birds are the owl's potential prey , and they will fly around it , sometimes even peck at it , to disturb it and drive it away . 

  The whole valley round St Nectan's Glen is teeming with bird life , a paradise for a young ornithologist . 

  Just below the glen the valley widens out into what is known as Rocky Valley , finally dropping off the map in rugged cliffs with a fall of some fifty or so feet down to the Atlantic Ocean . 

  There are some ruins down there and some prehistoric engravings in the rock faces . 

  It can be a pretty creepy place , too , but it's not as isolated and overgrown as the glen , so at least it's lighter . 

  Here I could inspect the nests of numerous smaller birds and their young . 

  There were tits , wagtails , nuthatches , treecreepers -- more than enough to keep any birdwatcher happy . 

  The presence of all these species also meant that I had a good chance of spotting the birds that preyed on them . 

  There were , however , other predators in the area -- the birdwatcher's menace , cats . 

  One day I chanced upon a chubby black and white brute molesting a helpless young sparrow and rushed to the rescue . 

  ( I know that in wildlife programmes on TV the professional naturalists never interfere with natural savagery , but since the size of the moggy population in the area is unnatural , I felt it was right to lend a hand . ) 

  The sparrow was not too badly injured as far as I could tell , but it was obviously in a state of shock and could not fly . 

  it needed care . 

  Not knowing much about bird first-aid , I was not sure what to do , so I took the bird home . 

  I had heard that a couple who lived across the road from us , Maureen and Aubrey Edwards , took in and cared for injured birds . 

  I did not really know them -- I'd been too shy to make friends with them , although I was interested in their work -- but it was the only place I could think of . 

  They were very helpful and admitted the patient immediately . 

  I'd been right in thinking that he was not seriously hurt , and they soon had him well again . 

  That was the start of a long and warm friendship with the Edwards family . 

  I discovered that they virtually ran a bird hospital and I was soon bringing them more casualties and learning a lot of useful things about bird-keeping and care . 

  On the whole , those first few years in North Cornwall were very happy times for me . 

  After a while , the bullying at school did not affect me too much , and I was in my element with all the wildlife around me . 

  But then , in 1986 , my father left home and my parents were divorced . 

  This may have pushed me back further into my shell . 

  I do not know . 

  I've always got on well with adults , but it's only now that I am starting to get on with my own generation , and I realise that I have to do that if I am to become a whole person . 

  But I suspect that the unhappiness at home threw me even deeper into my ornithology , and made me want to spend more and more time with birds . 

  One of the results of this was that I was often to be found across the road at the Edwards' place . 

  From the street it looked like an ordinary , large , detached house . 

  But if you looked carefully at the left-hand side , where there was a glass-enclosed porch , you might have noticed a few little birds flying around , the odd flash and flitter of coloured wings . 

  And if there was a gap in the traffic and all was quiet for a moment , you might hear all sorts of weird twitterings , squawks , toowoos , cheeps and hoots . 

  Round the back you would step out on to a paved patio , leading to a long garden overlooking a field . 

  But any flowers there might have been in the garden would probably have been eaten by the resident goats , rabbits and God-knows-whatever-else were around at the time , for the kind-hearted Edwardses never turned any sick or homeless creature away . 

  Wild or tame , mad or sane , it was all the same to them . 

  They just loved all animals . 

  But Maureen's speciality was birds . 

  A lot of people thought of Maureen's house as " the bird hospital " , but in fact the garden was like a street of birds , with cages and aviaries stacked along either side of it like tower blocks . 

  The patients who recovered in these boxes and enclosures came and went like the inmates of any other busy casualty ward , but , of course , there were big differences : most importantly , there was no waiting list , and no one had to pay ! 

  One day there might be a bleary-eyed buzzard with his wing taped up in a splint , looking very sorry for himself ; the next there might be a baby sparrow basking under a red heat-lamp , recuperating from the attentions of a cat . 

  Unfortunately , despite all Maureen's efforts , few of these smaller birds ever survived such an experience . 

  My sparrow had been lucky that I scared the cat off when I did . 

  Mostly they died of shock , particularly the younger ones , so it was a bonus when one recovered . 

  If only cat owners realised the damage their pets do to garden birds . 

  Maybe if more people built high bird-tables instead of just throwing breadcrumbs out on to the lawn and tempting the birds to risk their necks , fewer birds would die from cat attacks . 

  Down the bottom of Maureen's garden there was a natural-looking waterhole ( a muddy puddle , actually ) for the ducks that roamed around wherever they pleased . 

  They used to build nests in the hedge that divided Maureen's property from her neighbours' . 

  A hedge is ideal for ducks to nest in -- although they usually build their nests on the ground , using leaves and grass , they like them to be well hidden . 

  So not only does the hedge provide the materials for the nest , it provides the camouflage as well . 

  One duck , however , was not a very serious mother -- she would lay her eggs all right , but could not be bothered to sit on them long enough for them to hatch . 

  Perhaps she had a poor memory and kept forgetting where she had left them . 

  Anyway , it did not seem to concern her -- she would simply make another nest and lay some more . 

  But as the drake plays no part in incubating the eggs , once the mother had wandered off , the eggs in the previous nests just went rotten . 

  There was one occasion when the addled eggs came in handy for pelting a kid on a motorbike who'd been riding up and down outside our house all evening and making a terrible noise . 

  I distinctly remember seeing a few of the eggs hitting the spokes of his front wheel as he slowed down . 

  The effect was very much like putting an egg in an open electric food mixer . 

  The biker and his bike got absolutely plastered in a green slimy substance . 

  Anyone who has ever smelt an addled egg will know just how horrible that would be . 

  There was an unpleasant odour blowing along our road all next day . 

  One of the most interesting cases that Maureen came across that I knew of was a peregrine falcon . 

  It was brought to her before I really got to know her , but it was with her for quite some time . 

  Small wonder , too , when you hear what happened to it . 

  When I first saw it , it was hopping around in the bottom of one of the larger aviaries . 

  It struck me as a bit odd that it never seemed to leave the ground . 

  Strange behaviour for a falcon -- they like to sit up high so that they can survey their kingdom . 

  Then I noticed the reason fur all this hopping and lurching . 

  It only had one wing . 

  Apparently every now and then it did succeed in reaching one of the lower perches , but I never saw it do so and to this day I do not know how it managed it . 

  I asked Maureen about this strange and spectacular bird , and she told me how it came to be in her care . 

  Apparently it had been reported hopping about in a car park close to the village . 

  When Maureen went to investigate , she discovered that the poor thing had lost its left wing . 

  Obviously , this is a serious disability fur a proud hunting bird like the peregrine falcon , but sometimes wings can be sewn back on . 

  Maureen searched the immediate area , hoping to find the missing limb , but no luck . 

  The cut where the wing had been severed was quite clean , and the blood had dried up , so she concluded that the poor bird must have flown through some overhead wires in the vicinity during the severe gales we'd had the night before . 

  This is not an uncommon occurrence because birds of prey have what is known as " tunnel vision " -- which means that although they can focus with deadly accuracy on the prey straight in front of them , they have difficulty seeing anything outside that direct line of sight . 

  Well , there was not much Maureen could do about this injury , but the wound did heal up nicely and she cared for the bird for over a year . 

  It did not seem too distressed by life in the aviary with the other birds , although I imagine it was all a bit of a come-down for this once proud and merciless hunter of the skies . 

  But eventually the Edwards family moved down the road to run a residential home for the elderly ( which , when you think about it , was a logical step from caring for birds ! ) and the peregrine and various other injured birds needed new homes where they could receive the same amount of care and attention . 

  Peregrine 

  So the peregrine was taken up country to a falconry and raptor breeding centre . 

  As soon as it arrived , one of the staff thought there was something unusual about it , and he was not referring to the missing wing . 

  After much investigation , he discovered that it was not a British resident at all , but a Russian bird that must somehow have been blown off course from its migratory route during the hurricane-force storms of the previous year -- the storms that had immediately preceded its arrival in our village car park . 

  This happens surprisingly often with migrating birds -- if the weather is too dreadful for them to be able to navigate properly ( and they do seem to rely on the sun or the stars , like medieval sailors ) , they will land in the hope of finding food and shelter until the wind drops or the rain clears up . 

  Which is why you find extraordinary things like a Russian peregrine falcon turning up in North Cornwall , when it might have been planning to spend the winter in the Tropics . 

  This story has a happy ending , because we learned later that the peregrine had been paired up with another Russian visitor of the same species . 

  it might have been permanently grounded , but I am sure it found life was not boring ! 

  Although I was still barely into my teens when I was spending this time with Maureen tending sick birds , I learned a lot about general care and identification -- even if we failed to spot our Russian defector . 

  Watching Maureen feed very small birds who were unable to do it for themselves was to stand me in good stead later , when I began breeding barn owls . 

  I remember the over-eager , gaping mouths and outstretched necks , as well as those who could only just about lift their eyelids and had to have the food forced down their throats so that they would have the strength to keep fighting for life . 

  The food consisted of seeds mixed with water , and various other delicacies , favourites of the particular species of bird -- insects for the sparrows , caterpillars for the tits , nuts , of course , for the nuthatches . 

  Meanwhile , the larger birds of prey were tucking into things like mice , rats , chicks and rabbits . 

  We used to catch rabbits when we could , but Maureen bought the rest of the " prey " from breeders who specialise in these things . 

  Now that I have a number of birds of my own , I do the same . 

  There's a hatchery in Ilminster where we buy day-old chicks by the thousand -- my birds get through about five hundred every month or two . 

  it's always the male chicks that are killed , as they're no good to the egg-producing farmers . 

  Force-feeding the birds of prey was Sometimes necessary -- any invalid may need to be encouraged to eat -- though it is a dangerous business which I never attempted with Maureen's patients . 

  But she was an expert and by watching her I at least gained some confidence , enough to feel I could try it myself one day . 

  Maureen's skill lay in basic first-aid and tender loving care , so I did not learn about diseases or complicated injuries -- but what I did learn was vital to my future work . 

  I picked up a lot about different species and their habitat , simply by listening to Maureen talk about the lifestyles of the birds she was looking after . 

  i also learned a lot of common sense about looking after birds -- feeding them , keeping them clean , judging their general state of health from the look of them , that sort of thing . 

  Seeing birds close up and handling them was a vital part of my education . 

  Before I met Maureen , it often seemed that for someone like myself , who was and is very interested in learning about all aspects of bird life , there was nowhere to go except libraries . 

  And nothing you can learn from a book compares with what you can acquire through practical experience . 

  I feel very lucky to have had someone like Maureen on my doorstep . 

  Without her and Aubrey's help and guidance , I would not be able to do what I do today . 

  I owe them more than I can say . 

  By the way , I also grew out of throwing rotten duck eggs at noisy bikers . 

  Barny 

  By the time I was twelve years old I had been thinking for some time about getting a bird of my own . 

  I appreciated I was taking on quite a responsibility -- I knew it would not be like having a budgie in a cage as a pet -- but I felt I could cope . 

  I wanted to train a bird of prey from scratch . 

  Ever since we'd moved to Cornwall I'd been reading more and more about birds of prey , and by this time I was pretty sure that falconry was the ideal career for me . 

  Falconry has been defined as " the taking of wild quarry in its natural state with trained hawks and falcons " . 

  In other words , you train a bird of prey to do under your control what it would do naturally in the wild . 

  It's one of the oldest sports in the world and was the " sport of kings " in England long before horse-racing took hold . 

  Nowadays , it's probably the only profession that enables you to spend time close to birds of prey and watch them in action . 

  There are falconry centres throughout Britain , but few of them are devoted exclusively to falconry . 

  Most of them have a collection of owls and other birds on display to the public . 

  Anyone who can train a suitable bird can set up a falconry centre , but the birds themselves are expensive to buy and to maintain , so it's not a hobby to be undertaken lightly . 

  Some places run day courses -- costing maybe 30 or 40 -- where you can learn to hold a bird and fly it ; they'd provide trained birds for the " students " to use . 

  But many centres insist that you take a four-day , one-week or two-week course . 

  That way if you're really keen you can learn something worthwhile -- and if you're just messing about you shall be put off by the price . 

  There's a lot to be said for the modern falconry centres -- anything that helps people to appreciate birds of prey is a good thing as far as I am concerned -- although it's a shame they have to be turned into tourist attractions . 

  I've discovered I am a purist at heart and prefer the traditional approach to the sport ! 

  But at the age of twelve I knew that a falconry course was way beyond my means , so for the time being I had to be content with reading about it . 

  That did not mean I could not acquire a bird of my own , though . 

  Unfortunately , as I said , my mother is allergic to feathers , so I could not have kept a bird at home even if I'd had one . 

  I had a friend who was also interested in birds of prey , and we'd thought that we'd buy one each and keep them both at his place . 

  My mother still said no , so I let the subject drop for a while . 

  I just continued to read anything I could and watch avidly all the " bird " programmes on television . 

  In the meantime , I became friendly with a neighbour , Derek Mills , and his wife Val , who said I could build an aviary on their land . 

  This was not only extremely kind , it was very convenient , as our back garden virtually backed on to their field . 

  Derek and I built the aviary between us out of ordinary three by three timber and chicken wire . 

  It's about twelve foot by ten foot , and seven foot high . 

  In one corner we put a box where the bird could shelter , and we covered this with corrugated iron sheeting ( though it's since been replaced with corrugated plastic ) . 

  The box is screened so you cannot see into it , giving the bird some privacy . 

  At one end there are double doors , so that you can go in through the outer door and shut it before opening the inner door -- which means there's less chance of a bird escaping . 

  The wind has battered this aviary a lot and the wire needs replacing -- in fact , when I can afford it I am going to knock it down and build a new one , but it's been very useful over the years . 

  In the meantime , my thirteenth birthday was coming up , and it seemed like a good time to revive my request for the perfect present : a bird of prey . 

  As chance would have it , there was a couple living just down the road from us who kept animals -- anything from horses to chinchillas , including a few birds of prey . 

  Years later they even kept a black panther for a while , until there were complaints and they were forced to send it to a wildlife park . 

  I decided to pay them a visit . 

  They had a male barn owl who was about a year old . 

  To tell the truth , he did not look in very good condition . 

  His feathers were okay , but he looked overweight and unfit . 

  This might have been because he'd been kept in an aviary and not given enough exercise , and i felt sure I could put that right . 

  But I was in two minds about him for another reason : he was already too old for training purposes , and of course that was why I wanted a bird . 

  The younger you get a bird of prey the better , really -- eight weeks is an ideal age . 

  This bird had never been handled , so he was completely wild and had no human bond or imprinting ( if you get a bird really young , it will think you are one of its parents , which helps ) . 

  In fact , barn owls are reckoned to be one of the hardest breeds to hand-rear and train , and they are not recommended for beginners -- though I did not know that then , What I did know was that I'd probably lost the battle with this owl before I'd started : I suspected he would be impossible to train , but I was so hooked on the idea of having my own bird that I could hardly drag myself away when I was looking at him . 

  Despite my misgivings , I dropped heavy hints at home . 

  I suppose I thought that I had to start somewhere , and if this bird did not work I could always sell it and buy another . 

  I did not hold out much hope , anyway -- Mum was still against the idea , and the aviary was not even finished . 

  I remember feeling a bit disappointed as I went to school on the morning of my birthday -- I'd rather have stayed home and finished the aviary . 

  The journey home seemed to take longer than usual because by that time I was dying to see what presents I'd receive . 

  I was hoping for some money , as I was saving frantically to buy the owl for myself . 

  When I got home Mum was acting very strangely and frogmarched me off to Derek's house . 

  She would not give any explanation , so I assumed it was to collect a present that was too big to hide at home , like a bike or something . 

  At Derek's we found a local photographer called Steve Blay waiting for us . 

  He's a friend of the family , and although I was surprised to see him , Mum explained that he'd come to take a few photographs of me for the family album -- after all , it's not every day you become a teenager . 

  I swallowed this , and even as they walked me down the garden path and into the field where the half-built aviary was situated , I still had no idea what was going on . 

  I feel a bit silly about it , looking back -- I did not even notice that the aviary had been finished , or that there was a tea chest mounted inside with a large " front door " sawn out of it . 

  As we drew closer , everybody else slowed down and eventually stopped . 

  I turned round to see why . 

  I was standing with my back to the aviary , my jacket almost touching the wire mesh , still puzzled . 

  Why were they grinning ? 

  Suddenly there was a commotion behind me . 

  I spun round to see what it was and was confronted by a barn owl flying madly around inside the aviary , flapping its wings against the mesh . 

  I was dumbfounded . 

  I honestly cannot remember how I felt at the time -- I think I was just shocked . 

  For a moment I did not even recognise it as the same owl Derek and I had been round to see a few weeks before . 

  Derek had finished building the aviary by himself and they had bought the bird that very afternoon while I was safely away at school . 

  It was literally a dream come true . 

  Derek , laughing heartily , gave me the key and I let myself in to meet my birthday present . 

  I was so excited that I forgot I was going into a cage with a wild bird . 

  There were a few frantic seconds while the owl went berserk around my head before disappearing inside its box . 

  It may not be very original , but I decided to call my own Barny . 

  I thought it was appropriate , not only because he was a barn owl , but because if you say it fast enough it sounds like " barmy " , which he was a bit . 

  It was also a simple name to shout during the training I hoped to carry out later . 

  I'd read a book called Falconry and Hawking by Philip Glazier , and I'd recommend it to anyone who was thinking of taking the training of birds of prey seriously . 

  I knew that the first step was to introduce Barny to jesses . 

  These are the leather straps you put round the bird's legs to hold it on the glove that you have to wear when you handle birds of prey . 

  You also attach a swivel to the jesses and a leash to the swivel so that the bird is Secure during short flights off your fist . 

  Always keen to do things economically if I could , I'd made my own jesses . 

  Buckskin is recommended in the falconry books , but it's not readily available in this country and leather does the job perfectly well . 

  You test the grain of the leather to see which way it stretches , and use the less stretchy bit for the length -- otherwise it will be like keeping the bird on a piece of elastic . 

  Cut a suitable length of leather . 

  This will depend on the size of the bird -- you want it to be comfortable and to be able to move its legs , but you also want to keep an untrained bird under firm control . 

  Fold one end of the strap over a couple of times and punch a hole through the three layers , then feed the other end through the hole to form a " button " . 

  Cut a slit in the other end of the jess so that it will fit through the swivel , and punch a hole at either end to stop it splitting any further . 

  The button end can then be fitted to the ring on the bird's leg , and the slit end to the swivel . 

  ( Any bird you purchase will be ringed . 

  Almost all British birds of prey are classed as endangered and you have to have a licence to keep them . 

  You also have to ring a bird that is to be sold , taken out in public or showed . 

  Ringing is normally done when the bird is eight to ten days old . ) 

  The two jesses -- one for each leg -- join the swivel in a V shape . 

  The swivel is a device of two metal rings linked by a swivelling stem . 

  It stops the jesses becoming twisted , and it also gives you something strong to attach a leash to . 

  The swivel will turn with the bird's movements , so that it does not get caught up in the leash . 

  When a bird is sitting on your fist , you keep the leash wrapped round the fingers of your glove so the bird's movements are restricted to the length of unwrapped leash . 

  At the moment I am training a red-tailed buzzard and only letting it move a few inches -- just off my fist and back again . 

  Anyway , my worst fears about Barny were confirmed the first time I tried to put a leash on him . 

  The result was disastrous . 

  As soon as I managed to put them on him -- which was not easy ! -- he tore away at his legs like a thing possessed and ripped off most of his lovely white leg feathers in the process . 

  His flesh was red and raw , but even after wounding himself like that , which must have been pretty painful , he did not stop . 

  I'd been applying a special cream to his ankles which was supposed to harden the skin , but it did not seem to do much good . 

  I think he must have eaten a lot of it , though if it tasted anything like it smelt it must have been vile . 

  He carried on ripping and tearing at his legs relentlessly and with sickening ferocity , even drawing blood at times . 

  In the end I saw that there was no way he would accept this treatment , and that it was doing both of us more harm than good . 

  I removed the offending items , and before it had really begun Barny's training programme came to a permanent halt . 

  I gave up . 

  You just cannot teach an old bird new tricks . 

  However , I had not finished with Barny yet . 

  He was to play the leading role in my plans to breed owls for release into the wild . 

  Like the one-winged Russian peregrine , Barny was destined to become a father many times over . 

  I put him out to stud , as it were . 

  And very good at it he was , too , although he was a little over-enthusiastic , especially where young females were concerned . 

  At one year old he was the ideal age for breeding and although he'd never been with another bird before , his first mate produced eggs within two months . 

  As the incubation period can be anything from twenty-eight to thirty-six days , with twenty-nine to thirty-two being the norm , Barny must have worked out what was required of him pretty quickly . 

  A barn owl usually lays an egg a day or every other day until there is a clutch of four to six . 

  So a week or so may elapse between the first and the last eggs hatching . 

  Breeders can increase production by taking an egg away and putting it in an incubator to hatch . 

  The female will then lay another to take its place . 

  If you do this several times in the course of a clutch being laid , you can more or less double the number of chicks . 

  The birds hatched in an incubator can then be hand-reared or given back to their parents , who will rear any number of chicks as long as they have enough food . 

  Hand-reared birds can be put back in the nest once they can feed themselves , but if they've become imprinted on a human , they may not respond properly to the other birds and the parents may reject them . 

  Once a chick bred in captivity can fly -- at the age of eight weeks or so -- it can be taken from its parents and released to hunt for itself for a month . 

  The idea is that it is then recaptured , but it will now be streetwise , so to speak , and good to train for hunting . 

  Of course , this practice runs the risk of losing the bird , so it's not often done . 

  In captivity or in the wild , the first two clutches of barn owl chicks often die because of the parents' inexperience . 

  An adult owl of either sex may kill its chicks and eat them -- I do not really understand why , because they are known to do this even if there is plenty of food . 

  I guess an inexperienced parent just does not know what to do with these intruders in the nest , and disposes of them the only way it can . 

  In theory , the parent owls share the workload of rearing chicks . 

  The father goes and hunts to bring back food , which he then leaves with the mother . 

  It is her responsibility to feed the chicks and keep them warm -- she rarely leaves the nest when she has tiny offspring . 

  This obviously means that the male's workload more than doubles , as he has to hunt for his mate and the babies as well as himself . 

  If food is scarce , the mother will feed the Smaller , weaker chicks to the larger ones , to ensure that at least some survive . 

  Barny may have been a natural for breeding , but he was useless at actually rearing his offspring . 

  in fact he was downright dangerous and ate some of the poor little things . 

  It's easy when you become attached to birds to think of them in human terms , particularly if you give them a human name . 

  But you've always got to remember that they are in fact extremely barbaric creatures . 

  A bird of prey lives for food -- it is the single most important thing in its existence . 

  A bird kept in captivity is fed all year round , so obviously it has an easier time than one in the wild which has to feed itself whatever the season , but it still has the hunting instinct . 

  When you look an owl in the eyes , you do not see wisdom , like folk tales say , you see cold , cruel pools -- you see death . 

  They do not have morals or manners , and they are not cuddly . 

  To them you are just a very large creature who for some unknown reason feeds them , and for that , and that alone , they may give you a grudging sort of respect , if owls have any idea what respect is . 

  I do not know why Barny chose to eat his own chicks , but I must not judge him in human terms . 

  Having said all that , owls are still lovable and i do kid myself that they care about me . 

  And when I got Dawn , I did sense that I had formed an almost human relationship with her . 

  I shall never know . 

  Dawn 

  When I realised that Barny was untrainable , I knew I would have to find a hand-reared owl if I was to stand any chance of training one successfully . 

  As I said , part of Barny's problem was that he'd never had any contact with people at all , and by the time I got him it was too late . 

  But I had my heart set on training a bird . 

  In addition to the excitement of watching such a magnificent creature in action , it really is the only way to learn about birds of prey -- and it would be my first step towards becoming a professional falconer one day . 

  So began my search for a suitable bird . 

  Still unaware that barn owls are notoriously difficult , I thought that although my experience with Barny had been unsuccessful , to say the least , I should stick to the same breed . 

  Also I did not have much money , and barn owls are much cheaper than a lot of birds of prey . 

  This is because they're no good fur falconry proper -- you can train them to fly free and return to you , but as they're nocturnal it's difficult to train them to hunt under " controlled conditions " , particularly if you want to do displays for the public . 

  For this reason , they do not command the high price of , say , peregrines or buzzards , which the professionals prefer . 

  Barn owls are popular as pets , though , and a good breeding pair can produce four clutches of eggs a year in captivity , which again keeps the price down -- it's all a question of supply and demand . 

  ( In the wild , a pair's capacity to reproduce is limited by the availability of food , and one or two clutches a year is normal . ) 

  I started looking in Cage and Aviary magazine after Sue Yen -- the lady I'd bought Barny from -- told me about it . 

  I took it regularly and pored over it every week for two months , but search and phone as I might , I could not find a decent barn owl . 

  Some breeders I rang did not have any left , others did not have any chicks of the age I wanted ( and after Barny , I was very wary of buying anything more than a few weeks old ) , and others lived in the Highlands of Scotland or somewhere equally inaccessible to me . 

  In fact , nearly all the breeders are based round the London area , which would still have meant a difficult journey to collect a bird , even if I could find one . 

  It was all terribly frustrating . 

  I was so eager to start training an owl , I felt I knew what I was taking on , and yet the right bird eluded me . 

  But then I had one of my rare good ideas : why not try ringing up those breeders who had only advertised at the beginning of the breeding season , about six months before ? 

  So I rounded up my bird-fancying friends' old copies of Cage and Aviary and studied them until I got back to the very beginning of the season , early March . 

  I reasoned that this was where I would find a small breeder advertising his or her first clutches of chicks for sale -- someone who was not big enough to justify advertising all year round . 

  in fact , although the breeding season is normally said to begin in March , this depends very much on the weather and , again , availability of food . 

  Both in the wild and in captivity , a pair of barn owls can breed all year round if the weather is good and food plentiful . 

  At Paradise Park , a sort of bird zoo near Penzance , a barn owl chick hatched on Christmas Day last year . 

  Nowadays I keep huge lists of every person , organisation and publication connected with birds , so I hope I shall never again have the problems I had finding that owl . 

  But my hunch proved right , I came across a few likely looking names and phone numbers and eventually I found a breeder in Bow , East London , who had several barn owls , all brothers and sisters , who would be the perfect training age for me . 

  In fact he had about eighteen birds on his books at the time , ranging in age from two weeks upwards , and he was hand-rearing them . 

  This was very promising indeed and Paul , the breeder , sounded like a really nice , caring sort of chap , so I told him I was very interested , and would call with a definite answer in a few days . 

  Now I had the difficulty of how to collect the owl . 

  I wanted a bird in the hand , but this one was practically in Shepherd's Bush ! 

  Derek was always very supportive of what I was trying to do -- helping me build the aviary in his back garden had made him interested in birds too -- but I could not expect him to drop everything and drive me from Tintagel to London . 

  He had a business to run and he was up to his neck in carpets all day long ; he's a carpet fitter , so you shall know what I mean . 

  Finally , on the day that I'd promised to ring the breeder back and let him know one way or the other , a miracle happened -- one of those strokes of luck that seem to come along when you least expect them to . 

  I'd gone across to the old folks' home to have a chat with Maureen and , inevitably , I was telling her about the trouble I was having . 

  Well , it happened that Maureen and Aubrey were about to set off on a round-Britain motoring holiday . 

  Maureen was very interested in buying a bird for herself , too , so she said , " Ring him back , Jon , and get all the details . 

  Tell him we might have two and I shall pick them up on our way back . " 

  I could not believe my luck . 

  I dashed straight back up the road to my own house , rang Paul and told him I'd definitely have one , and maybe two . 

  I explained about Maureen calling round to collect and said she'd bring the cash . 

  He was obviously satisfied that I was on the level and reserved two birds on the spot , 35 each . 

  I waved Maureen off the next day , telling her I could not wait to see her again , that I would be counting the days till her return . 

  Now all I had to do was wait . 

  Well , it was like waiting for Christmas when you're a small child : every day seems to last about six months . 

  And the Edwardses were gone three weeks ! 

  Every day after the first two weeks I would look anxiously up and down the road , hoping to see their car . 

  All sorts of doubts clouded my mind . 

  What if the dealer had a cash-in-hand offer from someone else and went back on his word ? 

  What if Maureen could not find his house ? 

  What if there was only one bird left and Maureen claimed it as hers ? 

  No , I knew she would not do such a thing . 

  I was becoming paranoid . 

  I was desperate . 

  Why did not Maureen come home ? 

  I need not have worried . 

  At the end of the third nerve-jangling week there was a knock on the door . 

  I cannot be sure what my face looked like when I opened it and saw Maureen on the doorstep , but I imagine it must have had a grin on it from ear to ear . 

  She was just standing there beaming , holding this big ball of fluff in her arms . 

  The ball of fluff had an old hag's face in the middle of it , with two slowly blinking eyes and a huge hooked nose . 

  At the other end were its feet and tail . 

  The tail was just a stump with a few feathers beginning to show through , rather like the beard stubble that appears when someone has not shaved fur a couple of days . 

  The feet were massive in proportion to the tiny body . 

  The heart shape that is characteristic of a barn owl's face was just beginning to show through . 

  It looked really ugly and beautiful at the same time . 

  Maureen had bought two owls -- this female , and the female's brother for herself . 

  She'd called him Sage , and she only stayed at my house for a few minutes as she had to get right back to see her new baby -- the owl , of course . 

  It was obvious from the moment she came into the house that Dawn , as I'd immediately christened her ( after all , I'd had three weeks to dream up the name ) , was a real character . 

  I took her to my room , so that her feathers would not get up Mum's nose . 

  But I think Dawn must have known about her allergy , because the moment Mum came into the room to see her , Dawn made a point of trying to sit on her breasts . 

  See what I mean about her being a real character ! 

  I'd particularly wanted a female barn owl , because they're slightly larger and stronger than the males , and with the extra grey colouring or toning of their feathers , I think they're more attractive . 

  It's purely a matter of personal preference , but as I sat on my bed that day , stroking Dawn , I knew that she was the one . 

  The whole business had been getting me down . 

  My dreams of training an owl had come to a standstill with Barny , and then another standstill when I could not find a bird to buy . 

  But now at last I had one , and she was my heart's desire . 

  I was just so relieved . 

  The longer my quest had gone on , the more Mum had begun to react to my moans of frustration with reservations of her own . 

  She knew that I'd have to keep Dawn in my bedroom to start with , and she'd been beginning to have second thoughts about letting me do that . 

  Luckily , the moment she met this cute little owl she came under her spell and fell in love with her , too . 

  They were never to become what you would call bosom friends , however , because every time Dawn went to Mum for a cuddle , Mum would sneeze and send her flying beak over tail across the room . 

  And Dawn's downy feathers got into everything , no matter what I did . 

  She was continuously moulting as she grew her feathers , and however many times I hoovered I could never get it all . 

  In the end I gave up . 

  So it was not quite a fairy-tale ending , but we did all live more or less happily ever after . 

  And as you shall see , Dawn proved to be a remarkable student , passing out with flying colours . 

  A real little princess , you might say . 

  When I first got Dawn she was a little over three weeks old . 

  I kept her in my bedroom for another three weeks , so that Mum would not have an allergic reaction . 

  I wanted to keep her warm and handle her as much as possible in preparation for training . 

  Occasionally I would take her into the lounge and Mum would have to keep back and hold a handkerchief over her nose and mouth so that she could not smell the feathers . 

  ( Have you ever tried having a conversation with someone who is holding a hanky over their face ? ) 

  At the time I could not bear to be parted from my new little owl . 

  I was so proud of her that I wanted to take lots of photographs of her while she was young , just like a proud parent with a new baby . 

  But I could not get my camera to work -- I hardly ever used the thing -- so I went to Derek's house one day to ask his advice on how to operate it . 

  I could not even put the film in properly ! 

  When I arrived , I found to my great irritation that I'd forgotten the film . 

  I'd been a bit dithery for a few days , sort of clumsy and absentminded , as you often get when you're feeling under the weather . 

  Well , after a while -- this was around nine in the morning -- I decided to go back to my house and get the reel of film . 

  I only live a few doors down the road from Derek and normally it would have taken me just a minute or two , but on this occasion it seemed to take ages . 

  I remember picking up the film and making my way back to Derek's , although even now the memory's a little hazy , and then I started to feel light-headed and dizzy . 

  Val , Derek's wife , noticed immediately that there was something wrong . 

  She saw that I was looking pale and vacant and told me to sit down . 

  I did as I was told and flopped down on a chair , but it gradually got worse and worse , and I felt as if I was going to be sick . 

  Also , when I went to stand up I was so whoozy that I just could not keep my balance , so I slumped back down again . 

  " This boy is very ill , " I heard Val say . 

  " Growing pains , " said Derek . 

  " Do not be so daft ! " said Val . 

  " Call the doctor . " 

  The doctor was called . 

  I was now drifting around in my own head , although I did see my mother rush in . 

  She was obviously flustered and I shall never forget her concerned eyes staring into mine . 

  From then onwards I deteriorated fast . 

  I had been moved into the front room and laid out like a corpse on the sofa . 

  Squiggly things were swimming round in front of my eyes , like transparent tadpoles . 

  I could not move a muscle , my whole body felt like jelly . 

  I'd gone stone cold but felt boiling hot . 

  It was like a fever , sweat was pouring out of me . 

  The doctor arrived and after examining me pronounced that I had some sort of mystery virus , and there was nothing he could do for me . 

  When I heard him say that , I thought he meant I was going to die . 

  I tried to get up but Derek's firm hands pushed me back down . 

  Then I heard the doctor , as he was leaving , say something like " Keep an eye on him ... 

  I shall call back later ... " 

  I smiled with relief . 

  Next Derek came up with the bright idea of making me walk to see how far I could get . 

  The women protested , but in a moment I was upright and swaying around . 

  I reached the floor pretty quickly , even with Derek's strong support . 

  By now I was virtually paralysed from head to toe . 

  I could just about twitch my fingers , but certainly could not pick anything up . 

  My arms were hurting and felt like lead . 

  Derek had another inspiration : what I needed was fresh air . 

  I was promptly carried outside into the garden and propped up in a chair . 

  But I did not perk up , so they carted me back indoors and called the doctor once more . 

  The same one came back , looking a bit annoyed . 

  He kept banging my leg with his little rubber hammer to test my reflexes , but there was no reaction . 

  He still could not get to the bottom of it . 

  Meanwhile , I was sweating and burning up so much that I was in danger of melting away into a puddle . 

  I am very vague about what happened during the rest of that morning , but apparently Val , Derek and Mum wanted a second opinion , so another doctor was called in . 

  He took one look at me and said , " Hospital . " 

  I was in another world by this time , inhabited by see-through creatures resembling owls and parrots ; it was a sweltering hot day and I was turning into a pond to support a dying race of transparent tadpoles . 

  I was definitely hallucinating . 

  Somebody phoned an ambulance and was told that it would take between an hour and an hour and a half to arrive , so Derek volunteered to drive me to Casualty at Freedom Fields Hospital in Plymouth , forty-five miles away . 

  Later I learned we made it in just under an hour , although I do not remember a thing . 

  When we got there I was immediately admitted for observation . 

  No one had a clue what was wrong with me and I had no idea what was going on . 

  I was in hospital for five days but I do not remember anything about that , either . 

  Mysteriously , a nurse later said that one night I got out of bed and walked to the toilet , and yet the next day I could not move . 

  I have no recollection of this night-trip to the loo . 

  After two or three days I started picking up . 

  I do not know what medication I was on , or whether I ate -- it's all a blank . 

  Amnesia is a weird thing ; it's like I lost five days out of my life . 

  Finally , my father came and I was discharged and taken home . 

  I spent about a fortnight in bed , and then felt fine again . 

  Thankfully , nothing like this has ever happened since . 

  The funny thing is no one knew what I was suffering from . 

  It might have been a delayed reaction to the drugs I had been taking for an operation I'd recently had on my foot , but this seemed unlikely . 

  After much speculation we all started to point the finger at Dawn . 

  I read about a kind of pneumonia owls can sometimes get , which humans , too , can catch . 

  It's a bit like psittacosis , the infectious disease parrots suffer from , which they can also pass on to humans . 

  Had I been infected by my owl ? 

  One night before I went to bed I asked her . 

  There was no reply , but just as I was turning away I swear I heard Dawn sneeze . 

  One of my next purchases is going to be a book on veterinary aspects of birds of prey . 

  My local vet is really helpful , but he's not a specialist , so I hope this will help him , too ! 

  Training Dawn 

  The first stage of Dawn's training was to make her sit on my fist properly , which meant getting her used to people , and to wearing the jesses and swivel and everything that had caused Barny to go berserk . 

  For about three weeks I sat constantly for about four hours a day with Dawn perched on my fist , watching TV or listening to the radio , quietly trying to make it seem as if this were the most natural thing in the world for a boy and his owl to be doing . 

  Even if I went into my bedroom to read or do homework , I'd still have her sitting there on my huge falconer's glove , fidgeting and glaring at me . 

  Encouraging her to tolerate the equipment was quite difficult at first . 

  She'd be very antagonistic when I was putting the jesses on , so the first thing she would do when I picked her up was pull at her feet and try to work herself loose . 

  She'd been used to hopping around and flapping about wherever she pleased , so it came as a bit of a shock to find her freedom of movement restricted by the jesses . 

  There was a look of betrayal in her small , moony eyes , and as I looked into them I could not help feeling a sense of guilt . 

  I just had to keep telling myself it would all be worthwhile for both of us : one day she would be flying free , which is not something that always happens to birds of prey bred in captivity . 

  For the first few days , Dawn would pull at the jesses with her beak every ten minutes or so . 

  During this time she gnawed her way through two sets of thick leather straps and ruined most of her leg feathers into the bargain by continually ripping them off . 

  Barn owls' leg feathers go right the way down to their feet , which makes them much more vulnerable than , say , a falcon , which has scaly skin on its legs that toughens up very quickly during training . 

  No matter how careful I was , Dawn soon had raw patches of skin where she'd pulled out her feathers . 

  I had to apply antiseptic cream on a couple of occasions when this pulling and rubbing with her beak had actually caused some bleeding . 

  The other great problem at this stage , of course , was getting her used to people . 

  Within about ten days she was happy enough with my mother and sisters around , but it took her a lot longer to settle down with other people , and with animals . 

  Dawn 

  When she was fastened to my fist people really scared her , whereas if she had been free she would have been able to take evasive action . 

  If we were sitting in a room and someone came in talking or making a noise , Dawn would panic and it would take me a few minutes to calm her down . 

  If a door creaked she'd jump with fright . 

  Even less familiar sounds upset her , but then barn owls do have excellent hearing -- they can hear a mouse moving on a woodland floor during a gale-force wind . 

  One of the functions of their facial disc is to transmit sound to the ears . 

  Barn owls have one ear slightly higher than the other , so sound comes to them at two different pitches . 

  When they hear something that sounds like prey , they move their heads until the frequency is the same in both ears , then keep their heads exactly in position and fly straight towards the sound . 

  As they close in on the prey , they thrust their talons forward and the mighty claws take over . 

  Owls' eyesight is good in dim light but not so good in total darkness ; it is their acute hearing and the accuracy with which they can pinpoint sounds that make them such successful hunters . 

  Dawn's nervousness while she was attached to my hand lasted for quite a while and there was nothing I could do about it other than reassure her . 

  I just had to be patient , it was one of those things . 

  The bird has to get used to its surroundings gradually . 

  Slowly but surely , however , she started to appear happier with the new arrangement . 

  By the time I'd had her a fortnight , and she was about five weeks old , her trust in me was growing . 

  The family pets were more difficult . 

  Birds and cats , as everyone knows , do not normally hit it off , and when Dawn met our cat , Jasper , this was most definitely the case . 

  For about a week cat and owl kept out of each other's way . 

  I do not think Dawn liked the look of Jasper's claws , and the feeling was mutual . 

  The atmosphere around the house was pretty frosty what with Dawn's long , cold looks and Jasper's icy stares , so I decided to start introducing them formally . 

  I put two chairs together , sat down on one with Dawn and got my mother to sit on the other chair with the cat . 

  The bird , of course , would fan out her feathers in typical " threat " behaviour , to make herself look bigger and fiercer . 

  She would hiss , cluck and even stick out her tongue -- anything to deter the cat from doing whatever it was she thought the cat was plotting to do . 

  Jasper , on the other hand , would sit there stiffly , with his ears pricked up , eyeing Dawn and apparently thinking , " Well , shall I or shall I not ? " 

  But luckily he kept his distance and never quite found the courage to have a go at her . 

  And if I'd been in his skin , and seen the power in Dawn's beak and feet , I do not think I'd have done anything either . 

  There was to be very little thaw in this cold war , but amazingly our family dog , Sabre , started to get quite friendly towards Dawn . 

  He was an Alsatian/ Labrador cross and Dawn , perhaps because she could see that he was just a big , overweight softie and no threat whatsoever , dropped her defences and began to relax in his company . 

  In fact , within a week I could sit on the same chair as the dog with Dawn on my fist . 

  Sabre would simply ignore her and nod off , while Dawn would , as usual , sit there tugging at her jesses . 

  It took another week or so for the cat to start to ignore Dawn , and even longer for her to stop taking too much notice of him and actually watch TV . 

  She always observed every move he made out of the corner of one eye , though , and if he stirred in any way , even just to stretch or yawn , she would immediately react and flex herself to take defensive action . 

  Although it might sound as though Dawn was petrified of Jasper there were a number of occasions when she scared him out of his skin . 

  Once Dawn took it into her head to attempt a sudden flight , jumped up in the air and found herself agonisingly caught , because of the tenderness round her feet under the jesses . 

  The result was a frenzied sort of screeching aerial war dance . 

  Poor Jasper happened to be curled up asleep some five feet away at the time and was rudely awakened . 

  He , in turn , leapt about three feet off the armchair and made a lightning bolt for the door , which unfortunately was closed . 

  It was like a Tom and Jerry cartoon to see him bang his head on the door , bounce back , look a little dazed , and then remember the terrifying " nightmare " he was escaping from , and shoot for cover behind the sofa . 

  Luckily my mother was out of the room at the time , or Dawn and I might have been sent to our room for giving her precious cat a heart attack . 

  One of the main processes in training a bird , and one which gave me a few problems , is known by falconers as " manning " . 

  Basically , this is getting the trainee bird used to strangers and strange surroundings . 

  This meant that I had , from the beginning , to spend a lot of time with my family while Dawn was learning to sit on my fist . 

  You will appreciate there is not much point in training a bird to do this if every time you enter a different environment or a stranger comes into view it becomes hysterical . 

  This process can take anything from a few weeks to a few months . 

  It probably is not worth persisting much longer than that , because if a bird does not respond by then , it's never likely to . 

  The problems I had getting Dawn used to my family were made worse for two reasons . 

  first , my mother's allergy meant she would sneeze every time she came near the owl , and , secondly , my little sister was so fascinated by Dawn that I could not keep her away . 

  You can imagine what loud sneezes did to Dawn's nervous system and how dangerous it is to have a playful two-year-old near a very jumpy bird of prey ! 

  My other sister , who was just coming into her teens , Showed very little interest in her big brother's " crazy " owl , but kept her distance , rather like a rabbit , I thought . 

  Visitors were probably the biggest problem of all , for people calling round did not expect to find a barn owl sitting in the living room . 

  Some of the neighbours knew about my interest in birds , but they thought I kept them in cages . 

  Their initial reactions were natural enough : they'd start pointing or gesturing towards Dawn and their voices would automatically grow louder through surprise and excitement . 

  They would also move closer to have a better look . 

  Dawn's reaction , too , was natural : she would start to get ruffled , then agitated , then threatening . 

  The visitor would understandably back off quickly and there would either be pandemonium or an utter , stunned silence . 

  At that point Dawn and I would usually have to leave the room . 

  Eventually Dawn settled down and began " ruffling up " her feathers . 

  This means fluffing them out and adapting them to whatever atmosphere she found herself in , and is a sure sign of contentment in a lot of birds . 

  Others display their feelings of relaxation by standing on one leg , as you've probably seen flamingoes do in nature films . 

  A barn owl's body feathers are mostly for warmth , while the wing and tail feathers are used for flight . 

  There is not much body under the feathers , so it's vulnerable to rain and damp , though the feathers are a good protection against the cold . 

  The soft down absorbs water like a sponge . 

  An adult owl normally knows this and stays in shelter , but inexperienced hunters may not have the sense to come in out of the rain . 

  Then they become waterlogged and are unable to fly until they dry out . 

  They may also catch chills . 

  I've heard of owls drowning in cattle troughs because they dive in to bathe , not realising how deep the water is , and become too wet and heavy to get out . 

  They have also been known to attack their own reflection in a mirror , so the sight of an imagined owl in the water may be another motive for diving into a trough . 

  There are other reasons for owls not hunting in the rain -- it hampers both vision and hearing , and limits vole activity , too , so there's less prey even for those owls that do choose to venture out . 

  ABOVE The facial disc of barn owls is the most clearly heart-shaped of all the owls . 

  It encloses the beak and eyes and helps transmit sound to the super-sensitive ears . 

  Again , you can see the beautiful soft texture of Dawn's feathers . 

  BELOW Four young barn owls at different stages of development . 

  The youngest , on the left , is about four weeks old ; the eldest , on the right , is fully fledged at nine or ten weeks . 

  The hag-faced look of the very young mellows by the time the chicks are about six weeks old . 

  You'd be amazed the things people want you to talk about at lectures ! 

  This is a way of showing what an owl's pellet looks like when it comes out of the bird , and then " dissecting " it to show the various bones and other indigestible bits and pieces that pass through the owl's system . 

  Dawn is very special to me , but I always have to remember that she is first and foremost a wild creature . 

  These feet are designed for catching and killing . 

  Zara the kestrel , sitting on my glove with wings held out , tail fanned out and head bent down in typical hovering pose -- she suspects I have food somewhere . 

  LEFT The red-tailed buzzard that I've started training recently , eating the leg of a rabbit . 

  These birds come from America , so they are difficult to get hold of and I had the added problem that I was looking at the end of the breeding season . 

  I was supposed to be saving up for a car , but I am still too young to take my driving test , so I bought her instead -- with the first payment of the advance for this book ! 

  She had been trained to hunt and then not used , so I've had to start training her again . 

  She's about seven years old , fully mature , and might live to be thirty or thirty-five . 

  A fully grown red tail is a massive bird , over two feet tall -- this one looks me in the eye when she sits on my fist . 

  ABOVE A father barn owl bringing food to his mate and chicks . 

  Unfortunately if anything happens to the mother he seems to be incapable of passing the food on to his offspring . ( ) 

  A quarry on farmland near where I live . 

  Barn owls roost during the day in the main tree in the picture , and tend to fly out between the bushes on the right . 

  About a week after Dawn first started " rousing up " , I felt she was ready for the next stage of her training . 

  I had to start introducing her to people and places outside the home environment . 

  This presented a hazard that she had not experienced before -- traffic . 

  Our house is just off the main shopping street of Tintagel , so there is always a lot of traffic going by . 

  Cars and lorries hooting , accelerating and braking put Dawn into a real flap . 

  I decided the only thing to do was throw her in at the deep end and go right down the village high street , where the roads were busiest and noisiest with holiday-makers , and simply stand there trying to calm her down . 

  Of course , I would only do this in the evenings when the streets were at their quietest . 

  The effect we had was really amusing . 

  We'd be sitting or standing watching the traffic go by , Dawn alternately flapping about desperately trying to get away and perching on my glove letting me stroke and soothe her . 

  Cars would slow down so that their drivers could have a better look . 

  Sometimes we literally stopped the traffic . 

  Friends would walk by , too , or stop and talk . 

  All this was really good training for Dawn , as it was contributing to her becoming accustomed to being a " captive " in the noisy world of humans . 

  This stage of training an owl is much more difficult than doing the same stage with a falcon , because with a falcon you just stick a hood over its head and let it get used to all the different noises . 

  An owl's head is too big and feathery for it to be " hooded " or blindfolded satisfactorily , so the problem of " manning " is twice over -- you have to acclimatise it to both sound and vision . 

  And barn owls are very inquisitive , as I discovered later when I began to take Dawn out into the fields . 

  She was easily distracted by any noise , particularly if there was a chance it was food or another bird calling , and this sometimes made it difficult for me to make her concentrate on what I thought she should be doing . 

  After a week or so of being outdoors Dawn gradually accepted the sights and sounds around her . 

  When a car went by she'd simply track it with her eyes and remain fairly unruffled ; stirred you might say , but not shaken . 

  She might even turn her head right round to see where the car had gone , but she would not consider it important enough to jump off the glove . 

  It would now take a motorist burping their horn or a dog barking nearby to get her hopping mad , which was real progress . 

  However I found there was always something new to overcome . 

  for example , just walking with her could be troublesome . 

  If there was a stiff breeze and a lot of traffic about , she'd become what is called " wingy " . 

  This refers to her opening her wings fully and riding the wind . 

  Obviously it is not to be encouraged when you're walking along with a bird on your glove , because the first thing that happens is the bird takes off . 

  A barn owl is not strong enough to hold tight to a glove in a strong wind . 

  At the moment I am training a red-tailed buzzard , which is a much bigger bird , and its claws are strong enough to allow it to grip on to my glove , so this is not so much of a problem . 

  In the wild , an owl would find shelter if it was too windy , closing itself up as tightly as possible . 

  Alternatively it might use the wind rather than fighting it : it would allow the wind to lift it up and then come down , flapping its wings and " closing down " until it was able to drop . 

  But if you're walking along with a bird on a jess , your movement disrupts it and stops it protecting itself from the wind as it would do naturally . 

  So Dawn would have to fly off a little , giving in to the force of the wind , and then come back . 

  The only way around these attempted take-offs was to walk very slowly so that we did not build up too much ground speed , as airline pilots would say , and stop if Dawn's wings did open . 

  If I stopped I found that she'd immediately close them again . 

  We must have looked a comical sight in those days : a boy and a bird " dancing " up the road -- two steps , stop , turn , two steps , turn , stop ... 

  Gradually , by walking slowly and shielding her from the wind as much as possible with my body , I cut the wings-open time to a minimum . 

  Our outdoor training sessions , however , could still be spoiled by hostile dogs , which would sometimes lunge at us from garden walls or charge round corners . 

  I'd have to spend half an hour calming Dawn down after these attacks . 

  But I was determined to get her ready for anything we might meet in the great outdoors . 

  Our sessions increased . 

  Sometimes I spent up to six hours a day with her , just getting her " streetwise " . 

  It was starting to get on my mother's nerves ; she thought I was spending far too much time with the bird and not enough with human beings ! 

  I suppose I was in danger of becoming a sort of " owloholic " , but I was thoroughly enjoying myself . 

  All I was doing at this time , if I was not at school , was watching TV , listening to music , reading or walking , with Dawn as my constant companion . 

  And when I was not with her , like when I had to go to school and she had to stay behind in my bedroom until I came home , she was all I could think about . 

  I wondered what she was doing , if she was all right , what I'd do with her when I got home ... 

  I think I even dreamed about her at night . 

  It would not be an exaggeration to say I lived for that owl during that very intense period of training . 

  Even at school I'd slip her into conversations whenever I could . 

  Not all my school friends believed I was training an owl , so when they said things like , " What're you doing tonight then , Jon ? " 

  I'd say , with a wicked grin , " Oh , I am spending the evening with me bird . " 

  Of course , they'd immediately jump to the wrong conclusion and think I was talking about a girlfriend , and I'd get some almighty teasing , but the joke was on them ! 

  Of course , there was a more serious side to all this . 

  It was true : I was spending every evening and night with my owl , so I was not leading what could be considered a normal teenager's life . 

  I realised I was missing out on things like girls and parties . 

  When friends asked me out I had to turn them down and one or two of them stopped calling round . 

  In effect I'd cut myself off from other kids of my own age . 

  But this could not be helped if I was serious about training Dawn , which I was . 

  I found it a bit disturbing sometimes but I just had to accept it . 

  It was a necessary sacrifice . 

  How could I expect my friends to understand that training a bird was virtually a twenty-four-hour-a-day job ? 

  However , quite a few teachers took an interest in what I was trying to do , especially the biology teachers , who were impressed with my knowledge of birds and conservation , and my English teachers , who soon heard all about my interest because whenever we had to give a talk in class , I would launch into a full lecture on rearing and handling owls and other birds of prey . 

  They would ask me how the training was going from time to time and this interest spurred me on . 

  One of the English teachers , Frank Almond , who was keen on filming , even videoed Dawn shortly after I'd trained her to fly free . 

  Once I'd accomplished the first stages of training , getting her to sit still on my fist , I had to move on to the next stage : getting her to feed there . 

  This was absolutely vital if I was ever to " fly " her , because it would be the lure of food on my fist that made her come back to me . 

  It would have been impossible to get her to eat if there was the slightest bit of tension in her . 

  All birds are very temperamental and finicky with their food at the best of times , so I started by slipping titbits of chick under her feet while she was sitting on the glove . 

  The aim of this simple exercise was to get her to move her feet and become aware that there was something tasty right under her beak , as it were . 

  first of all she just ripped at it and slung it around , although after a couple of days she was tearing off dainty morsels and swallowing them . 

  But she was still only playing with her food like a bored baby . 

  I overcame this problem quite easily in the end : I just gave her less for supper when she was off my hand , got her weight down , say , half an ounce , and built up her appetite , so that when I had her on my fist she'd be hungry . 

  After about a week she was tearing off big lumps of the dead chicks I was feeding her . 

  Then I realised this was unusual for an owl , because in the wild they tend to swallow their prey whole , so I simply stopped holding on to the chick and soon she was gobbling it up in one . 

  This she did rather neatly by picking it up , tossing it in the air and catching it in her throat ; it was like a party trick . 

  So I succeeded in training her to feed on the fist . 

  Teaching her to do this when she was moving , however , was a different matter altogether , yet another stage in the patient , painstaking training . 

  And you cannot hurry patience . 

  If a bird has food , it's much more concerned with what's going on around it , because it's afraid that another predator might steal it . 

  You may even have noticed this alertness from observing the behaviour of the domestic dog : they're much more wary when they're eating . 

  So encouraging Dawn to feed when we were out of doors was not as easy as it sounds , because her attention was completely absorbed in what was happening around her . 

  Again I had to resort to cutting down her weight , so that she'd be hungry enough to focus more on the food . 

  But I had to be careful I did not knock her weight down too much , because her fitness could deteriorate . 

  Birds do not have large reserves of fat ; in the wild they're more or less constantly at their perfect flying weight . 

  A drop of over an ounce for a bird Dawn's size could have seriously damaged her health , and , therefore , her ability to fly . 

  And I must admit I did not know at the time exactly what her flying weight should be . 

  While I was training her , I kept her weight at about 10 ounces . 

  This was partly because it is easier to train a bird to come back to you if it's hungry -- not starving , you understand , but a bit peckish and more interested in food than it might otherwise be . 

  Now that Dawn is fully trained , her weight tends to be about 12 or 13 ounces , and that's fine for her . 

  During training -- or later , if I wanted to knock her weight down for any reason -- she'd have one day-old chick a day . 

  Even now , two or three a day is all she needs . 

  Birds in the wild do not have much variety in their diet -- it really does not seem to bother them -- but I give Dawn mice sometimes , and a rat every now and again as a " treat " . 

  She has a rat on top of the living room door on Christmas Day , for example , and it will last her two days . 

  It's too heavy for her to carry , so she pulls it to pieces with her beak , holding it tightly in her talons . 

  It's all very messy . 

  ( My red-tailed buzzard , on the other hand , can drag a fully grown rabbit in her claws , but then she is two feet tall and weighs 3 pounds or more , nearly four times Dawn's weight . ) 

  Something I found distasteful at first was the actual preparation of Dawn's food . 

  I was not used to handling dead things , like chicks , not to mention mammals like rats and mice . 

  I mostly use chicks I buy frozen from a local supplier . 

  Although it has now become a way of life , I still find it disturbing . 

  There's something about watching little birds , even dead ones , being torn to shreds by a powerful beak that turns my stomach . 

  Obviously you get more used to it the more often you do it , but it's still pretty gross . 

  Each chick you feed the owl feels like a little sacrifice . 

  I could actually feel Dawn ripping up the dead creatures as she sat on my fist and the blood was soaking through my glove . 

  It was a very sickly , unpleasant and sticky sensation . 

  Truly gruesome . 

  And then of course there was the smell . 

  It was all very violent and distressing to observe at close quarters and the stench really brought it home to me . 

  My mother was not too pleased either because sometimes there would be spillages on her carpets . 

  Training a bird of prey is definitely not recommended if you've got a weak stomach and a house-proud mother ! 

  There was , however , a funny side to all this , although it sounds a bit ghoulish to mention it . 

  On one occasion I was round at a neighbour's house and despite my warnings that it could get rather messy , they insisted that I show them how Dawn fed . 

  Sure enough , right in front of her astonished onlookers , she set about disembowelling a dead chick . 

  I held out my free hand to catch the gooey bits before they fell on the rug and , mischievously I thought , Dawn proceeded to place them in a precise bloody pile in the palm of my hand . 

  A few mouths dropped open and then there were a few nervous giggles . 

  They were really shocked . 

  Needless to say , I was not asked for a repeat performance ! 

  There were many other incidents like this one , some even more distasteful , but I'd better not go into them . 

  The point I am trying to make is that you can train a bird of prey to do only certain things . 

  You cannot house-train it as you can a cat . 

  You cannot teach it to eat from a certain bowl in a certain place , or to do its business in a litter box . 

  The whole idea is to get the bird to act naturally on your fist . 

  After this , of course , you reach the last stage of training : free flying . 

  This stage of the training took place in the field beyond our back garden . 

  The object is to train a bird to fly free , but then to come back for food . 

  I would have the food in my hand -- hence all the effort to make her take food from me at home -- and I made sure she could see it , however much I loosened her leash . 

  In the end , of course , the theory is that the bird gets used to the food being there and comes back at the wag of a finger . 

  Of course , once you release a wild bird , however well you've trained it , you do run the risk of it just flying away . 

  I think it's more likely to happen on the third or fourth flight , once the bird has caught on to the idea of freedom , which is why it's important to keep it reasonably hungry . 

  Dawn did once disappear for two days , but I now know where to look for her if she vanishes . 

  There are various likely barns near where I live where she might seek shelter , and I've always managed to lure her back with food . 

  Sometimes it's worth going away for a while and letting her think she's beaten you , and then coming back with the food a few hours later . 

  I also know how to get the red-tailed buzzard out of a tree at night , so if it flies off I stay by the tree in which it settles until dark , then I go and fetch sticks and a torch so that I can see what I am doing . 

  I can literally push the bird out of the tree into a net or a box so I can take it home , because it cannot see to fly off in the dark . 

  The sophisticated way of tracking birds is by telemetry . 

  You attach a transmitter to the jesses and keep the receiver with you -- this can pinpoint a bird within a hundred yards over a radius of fifteen miles . 

  And if you're flying more than one bird , you can take the transmitter off when you've finished with one and simply attach it to the next . 

  It has disadvantages , of course : bigger birds like eagles tend to bite the transmitter off , and , like so many things to do with birds of prey , telemetry sets are expensive . 

  For the time being I shall continue to rely on knowing enough about a bird's habits to be able to track it down . 

  I found I had to get Dawn's weight down much more than I'd expected , or would have wished , just to persuade her to come for the food on my fist . 

  To begin this stage of training you have to get the bird to step on to your glove , not jump , but step , very deliberately and confidently . 

  And that is not easy . 

  You have to be sure the bird is very hungry , and if it's not you have to sit down and wait for a long , long time . 

  Over the first four days it was all I could do to get Dawn to step off the perch I'd set up in the field , with my glove just a few inches away from her . 

  Sometimes she'd keep me waiting there for over an hour while she scanned the surroundings through 180 degrees , over and over again . 

  I imagine it would be virtually impossible to sneak up on an owl . 

  When she did finally reach for the food , or lure , all she would do was lean over and rip off a piece , rather than step on to the glove . 

  I started moving the lure when it was already in her beak , but before she could tear it . 

  Then she had to make that all-important first step . 

  If I took the food away from her too often , though , there was a danger she would lose interest , so I had to give in to her a few times . 

  I could not let her have her own way every time , however , otherwise she'd end up training me ! 

  It was really a battle of wills . 

  Quite often she'd make a grab , I'd move with her and there would be a tug'o'war , ending up with the food breaking or her giving up . 

  When this happened she had one option ; there was only one other perch available : my fist . 

  It was either that or dump herself on to the perch in a heap , having given up the struggle , and she was much too graceful and proud to let something as undignified as that happen . 

  She soon discovered that by stepping on to the glove she had the food literally at her feet . 

  Whenever she did this successfully , of course , I'd reward her handsomely with more food and words of praise . 

  Birds , like people , will not waste their energy . 

  It was not crucial at this stage to get her to step on to the glove repeatedly ; it was more important for her to develop the right attitude to the whole process . 

  I had to make her see that the exercise was worth her while . 

  You just have to carry on making the bird think about the reward , until the step or jump becomes automatic . 

  In Dawn's case , it took a full week before she was " jump flying " the full length of her leash , from the perch to the glove . 

  I had now accomplished a vital part of her training process . 

  She was ready for the next stage of free flight ! 

  With most birds , unless they're very stubborn , if you increase the distance between perch and glove , little by little , they will readily fly the extra distance . 

  You wait until they're looking your way and then give a whistle or call . 

  I could see Dawn thinking to herself , " Oh , well , this is easy . " 

  And then she'd make the jump and glide to my fist . 

  As long as I ensured that she was in peak physical condition , it was not too difficult to get her to fly further the next time . 

  To do this , of course , you have to put the bird on a much longer line , something falconers call a " creance " . 

  The one I used for Dawn was a hundred feet long . 

  To begin with I tried a loose creance . 

  Basically , you hold this as you would a short leash , wrapped around your bottom two fingers and tied to your glove , so that you can easily pay it out as you increase the flight distance . 

  I allowed about six feet at first , just in case Dawn overshot the glove . 

  The problem with this was that although Dawn was interested in the chick , once she was airborne she also realised that she had freedom and that's very attractive , too ! 

  So she'd try to fly to another perch , which is what you call in falconry " fence-hopping " . 

  And obviously this must be discouraged . 

  The whole point is to get the bird to come back to you every time . 

  To prevent her flying off I used what I called a " straight creance , . 

  This consists of a long line tied to one perch , which the bird is sitting on , stretching across the field to another perch , up to 120 feet away . 

  I then attached a ring to this line and connected it to Dawn's leash . 

  She would have the length of the leash to fly with , but would only be able to fly in a straight line , to me , at the other end of the fixed creance . 

  At first Dawn would attempt to continue beyond the far perch where I was waiting , instead of landing on my glove . 

  This was only natural , so I just had to grab her leash as she flew by and carry her back on my glove . 

  After a while she began to get the message , but it required a lot of patience . 

  It was five weeks before she would regularly go for the chick along the line , and even then she'd often wait for up to ten minutes to make up her mind . 

  The problem with the " fixed " or " straight " creance , however , was the wind . 

  Dawn preferred to fly into the wind , to use the updraught , and then angle in at my fist . 

  This was fine until the wind direction changed slightly and came across the fixed line . 

  She would then try to adjust her flight path to the fist by altering direction into the wind . 

  Of course , the short leash would not allow her to do this . 

  It was at this point that I decided to put her back on a loose creance , so that she could approach the lure from whatever direction she pleased . 

  I had to give her a little reminder now and then , to stop her attempting to fly off into the wide blue yonder , by gently pulling the leash , but within two days she was coming to me just as willingly as she had on the straight creance . 

  I still thought she should be keener , however , so I knocked yet another half an ounce off her flying weight , until she was so eager that she set off towards me virtually the moment she saw me putting on the glove . 

  We were now at a crucial point in the training . 

  She was getting tired of the equipment -- the leash and ring and creance -- slowing her down , and I had to pluck up the courage to let her fly free for the first time . 

  I invited Richard , a local falconer friend of mine , and his girlfriend Rosie to come over and watch Dawn's first flight . 

  I wanted Richard's opinion on her flying ability . 

  He and Rosie were both impressed by the loose creance work I was doing , so I took a deep breath and removed all the equipment , except for the jesses . 

  For Dawn's first solo flight I played a little trick on her . 

  I set her down on her usual perch and slowly walked in a straight line to the far perch , some ninety feet away . 

  If my deception worked , she'd still think she was attached to the creance and fly straight to me as usual when I showed her the chick . 

  There were a few anxious moments , but as soon as I pulled on the glove she came straight at me , low and very fast indeed , much swifter of course than she could have done if she had still been carrying the equipment . 

  It was breathtaking . 

  Even Dawn must have felt good about it . 

  She must have realised that she was no longer encumbered , but completely free . 

  She had never flown so fast and with such ease before . 

  I flew her three times straight off , and then returned her to the aviary . 

  I felt an incredible sense of relief and achievement , but as Richard quickly reminded me it's not during the first free flights that a bird takes the opportunity to fly off , because it does not fully realise what it means to be free . 

  It's when you've been flying them for a few days consecutively that it ( pardon the pun ) dawns on them that they could escape and find out what's over the next hill . 

  I still had that hurdle to overcome . 

  This is something else that is more difficult with an owl than a falcon . 

  Falcons are interested in food to the exclusion of everything else , but an owl likes to know precisely what's going on around it , even if it's hungry . 

  So the first thing an owl will do when you release it is to scout out the land . 

  Dawn is particularly inquisitive , and I soon discovered she would never fly properly in a new area without investigating it first , even if I was holding out food for her . 

  Not only this , but because owls are naturally nocturnal , if I released Dawn during the day , she was quite likely to seek out a suitable roosting place rather than come back to me for food , if the fancy took her . 

  As a result , I was often wasting my time during our first few flying sessions . 

  As I was training Dawn more to display her than to use her to hunt , this comparative lack of interest in food was not a problem . 

  Later I trained a kestrel which I found much less inquisitive and more likely to come straight to me for the food . 

  I am training the red-tailed buzzard as a hunting bird , though , and I've found it sometimes prefers to look around for food for itself , rather than just come to my lure . 

  After Richard reminded me of the problems I was about to face following that first flight , I was not looking forward to the next flying lesson . 

  Just for a moment my glorious sense of achievement faded into apprehension . 

  I had ideal flying weather over that first week , though , and Dawn was soon flying distances of 250 feet from perch to fist in Derek's field . 

  It was at this point , partly because I was so nervous , that I felt it necessary to build her weight up a little , so I fed her up and overdid it , with the result that she got above her ideal flying weight . 

  I had to wait four days before I could risk flying her again . 

  If she was not hungry enough to be interested in food , she could easily have flown off . 

  My nerves were really on edge when the time came round to try her , because I feared she might have lapsed , forgotten how to fly to me . 

  So I did something you should not really do after a bird has completed a successful free flight : I put her back on the creance . 

  She knew what had happened , all right : she was being slowed down again . 

  On her first flight the drag held her back . 

  She flew well , though , so I removed the creance after just one flight . 

  This time she seemed to be in two minds about what to do . 

  There was an agonising delay as she pondered . 

  As you can imagine , I was really nervous again . 

  I could not take my eyes of her . 

  I could see her checking out every point on the landscape , sussing the locality . 

  What would she do ? 

  It must have only lasted a couple of minutes but believe me it felt like hours . 

  Suddenly she rose from the post , some 250 feet from me , and with a dozen or so leisurely beats of her magnificent wings she was angling in to land on my glove and devour her prize ! 

  I sighed with relief and quickly snatched up her jesses , wrapping them securely round my bottom two fingers . 

  " Good girl , Dawn , " I breathed , " good girl . " 

  It took me a few minutes to feel brave enough to try her again . 

  This time she more or less flew straight to me , and I felt confident enough to fly her another three or four times , each one successfully , although eventually I sensed she was losing interest , fretfully tearing at her jesses and gazing round . 

  I was concentrating too hard to feel elated or amazed that I had actually trained this wild creature to come to me at will . 

  That sense of achievement would come later . 

  I knocked her weight down an eighth of an ounce in preparation for the next flight , but the next day the weather was too bad for flying , so I " fattened " her up again . 

  We're talking about half an ounce , which does not exactly sound like a weight problem , but it took me another day or so to take it off her . 

  Meanwhile the weather had not improved at all , setting me back several days . 

  I never fly the birds in bad weather , which means sometimes Dawn goes two weeks without a flight . 

  The red-tail can cope with fairly strong winds , but Dawn cannot . 

  I give them extra food when they're not flying , because there , s no need to keep them even slightly hungry . 

  In the wild , a barn owl would take refuge in a barn and would probably manage to catch mice there . 

  Failing that , it can survive on spiders . 

  At last the rain held off and although the wind was a little strong I knew that I had to fly her . 

  Once more my nerves were frayed . 

  But I need not have worried , she came to me just as smoothly as before , and I flew her half a dozen times a session over the next four days . 

  We had both come a very long way . 

  When you're training a bird , however , there always seems to be yet another step . 

  After three weeks of perch work I decided it was time to start training her to fly from other locations . 

  In other words , she had to go off and find places for herself and then fly back to me . 

  I did not want to have to keep carrying her back to the same perch for the rest of her life , although she did occasionally fly to the perch herself , she was so used to it . 

  Now the old problem arose again : she found herself in new places and she was more interested in exploring them thoroughly than she was in the chick , even though she was at flying weight . 

  I knew she had to come to me each time , it was just a case of sticking it out . 

  Once she kept me hanging around for an hour and a half , which might sound like a backward step , but you have to remember she was sitting in a place of her own choice , and was taking it all in . 

  Anyway , after I'd introduced her to a few different locations and got her over the initial newness of the experience , she seemed perfectly willing to come to me . 

  At this point I thought I'd cracked it , and I probably had , but even now each flying session is a nerve-wracking experience , at least for me ! 

  Everything I've said about the training of Dawn might lead you to think it's just a question of patience and keeping her weight at the right level , but there really is much more to it than that . 

  Even when she was flying to me from various positions , the slightest disturbance in the landscape might distract her attention . 

  And often she'd touch down on my glove only to find something not quite right and promptly take off again . 

  I had to keep calling to her and whistling and showing her the chick . 

  It was exhausting . 

  The whole process was one of the most tiring and yet satisfying things I have ever done in my life . 

  And still there is something more needed in order to train a bird . 

  There were times when my temper was sorely tested . 

  Our relation ship was rather like that of a father and child . 

  You have to love the bird . 

  You have to give your whole self . 

  Really . 

  One of the most touching moments in the whole training period demonstrates this point , and it is just one of many special instances I can remember . 

  Once , during free flying , Dawn disappeared in some long grass . 

  I called and whistled and waited a full hour and a half , No Dawn . 

  finally , I was forced to walk over to her -- and no self-respecting falconer likes to do this . 

  I was feeling pretty angry with her as I stomped across that big field , but when I reached her my heart just melted . 

  She had flattened the grass , burrowed down and made a cosy little nest for herself . 

  And there she was : sound asleep . 

  I just laughed , but it brought a lump to my throat too . 

  Sometimes , when she was startled or frightened on my fist or as I approached her , it was painful to think that I might be responsible for her fear . 

  And that's what it's all about really : a loving , trusting relationship . 

  Without that there can be no training . 

  I do not know how Dawn really feels about me , whether love or trust mean anything to her or not , but I do know that there is something special between us , and it feels like something more than just conditioning . 

  I could not have trained Dawn if we had not felt this closeness or warmth for each other , and you cannot learn how to build such a relationship from books . 

  You have to experience some sort of bond between yourself and the bird , something almost unfathomable but nonetheless real . 

  Dawn and I , I like to think , have such a relationship . 

  Man has been training birds of prey since ancient times and I am in no doubt that success has always been based on patience , mutual trust and observation . 

  If anyone wanted to attempt it from what they've read in this book , I would strongly recommend that they think very carefully about it before they acquire a bird . 

  I know of one boy who tried it and lasted only fourteen hours ! 

  It's extremely time-consuming , and if just one step , a single link in the chain of training , is missed or rushed , the whole process is ruined . 

  In my case it was all worthwhile , but then Dawn is not merely a pet ; she is a wild creature and always will be . 

  She's also very special and there is not another barn owl in the world like her ! 

  Lectures 

  When I was in the fourth year at school we had to do orals as part of our English GCSE examination . 

  We all had to stand up in turn in front of the class and give a short talk , followed by a question-and-answer session . 

  The idea was to assess our ability to present a speech , paying close attention to vocabulary , non-verbal communication ( body language and tone of voice ) and keeping a sense of what the audience is thinking . 

  Little did I know how useful these things were going to be to me in the future . 

  Quite a few of my classmates had done their speeches and I was getting really nervous as the day for my turn drew closer and closer . 

  At the time I was in the throes of training Dawn and it seemed obvious that I should do my talk on the owl . 

  My teacher , Mr Taylor , did tell us to do our talk on something we knew about , so I asked if I could bring Dawn in and tell the other kids about what I was doing . 

  He thought this was a great idea and suggested I structure my talk in two parts : the training of Dawn , and a little bit about barn owls in general . 

  I did not know very much about barn owls at the time , so I busied myself reading everything I could find on them , in the library and magazines . 

  It was pleasant work . 

  By this time Dawn was fully grown . 

  Barn owls leave the nest at two to three months and are sexually mature at one year . 

  They are capable of flight at 56 days -- a strange figure which nonetheless seems to be remarkably constant . 

  The oldest known wild barn owl lived to be nearly eighteen years old , but a male in London Zoo was recorded at twenty . 

  In fact , remarkably few birds of prey survive their first winter in the wild , but once they have done so life seems to be a bit easier for them . 

  In adult plumage a barn owl is beautiful and Dawn was no exception . 

  By the time I came to do my first talk , her feathers were a lovely tawny colour with large patches flecked with grey and smaller specks of black and white . 

  The characteristic heart-shaped facial disc had come through an almost golden colour , and her breast was a stunning white except for the top which had a very faint tint of golden brown . 

  The black specks along the side of her body are often found in female barn owls , but not so much in males . 

  From a distance her eyes are dark black but if you look closely you see a ring of dark brown around the pupil . 

  The female barn owl is usually taller than the male , about 14 inches to his 13 , and also usually darker . 

  This is not always the case , though -- I once had a kestrel that I'd decided from its plumage was a male and it turned out to be a female , and although this has never happened to me with a barn owl , I know people who've made that mistake . 

  The big day for my talk soon came round . 

  Derek gave me a lift in with the bird and all the equipment and said he'd stay with me in the classroom in case anything went wrong . 

  I was grateful to him because I was really shaking with fear , so much so that poor Dawn could hardly sit up straight on my hand . 

  Her feathers were rippling up and down like leaves in the breeze as she struggled to get a secure footing on me . 

  Although she was trained , she was still a beginner -- like me -- and it was not easy to settle her down in front of all those kids , who , naturally , were all pointing and whispering when we came into the classroom . 

  I'd get her settled and then there would be some distraction and she'd start jumping around , or " bating " as falconers call it . 

  I cannot remember much about that first talk , but it went on for much longer than the five to ten minutes it was supposed to last . 

  I just introduced her , said that she was a female and went on from there . 

  I knew I was going on too long , but I kept thinking that Mr Taylor would butt in and stop me if he wanted to . 

  He did not . 

  Every time I looked across at him he just grinned and kept his arms folded . 

  The whole class was wide-eyed , glued to the bird . 

  I do not think they were listening to a word I was saying , they were just watching to see what Dawn was going to do next . 

  For them the time must have flown by , but for me it seemed as if I'd been standing out there all morning ! 

  Anyway , after about half an hour -- the whole lesson -- I just dried up and said something like , " Well , that's it . " 

  My ordeal was over . 

  To my surprise everyone applauded . 

  Afterwards Mr Taylor kept me behind even longer , asking me more questions about the bird . 

  I did not mind because I did not like the next lesson anyway . 

  I'd done really well in the test , he said , gaining the joint highest mark in the class . 

  As you can imagine , the news that Hadwick had an owl in school spread round like wildfire . 

  I remember standing in the dinner queue and all these kids coming up to me , asking me if it was true , where I had got her from and what I was doing with her . 

  I turned red with embarrassment . 

  I simply was not used to all the attention , but I answered their questions as best I could . 

  By then I have to admit I wanted to stop talking and get back to my quiet one-to-one relationship with Dawn . 

  There was still so much to do . 

  Besides , despite the fact that I'd got a good grade for my speech , I thought I'd made a bit of a mess of it and was just relieved it was all over . 

  As far as I was concerned that was an end to it . 

  But I was wrong . 

  Two weeks later , to my horror , Mr Taylor stopped me in the corridor and asked me if I'd consider doing another talk -- to another class . 

  Apparently he'd been telling all the other English teachers about it and now they all wanted their classes to see and hear about Hadwick's owl . 

  Well , I could hardly say no , although it was the last thing I wanted . 

  This time I was even more nervous . 

  I mean it was one thing standing up in front of my own group and giving a lecture , but it was quite another kettle of kippers doing it in front of a strange class . 

  I knew some of them and they were notorious . 

  They would take the mickey out of me with sickening enthusiasm . 

  I was paralysed with fear at the very thought of making eye contact with them , let alone playing the teacher . 

  But three days later there I was , with Dawn perched on my fist , chatting to the whole mob . 

  It was a nightmare for someone as shy as I was then . 

  But I need not have worried . 

  I was meant to talk for fifteen minutes but I went on for three-quarters of an hour . 

  I would not say I enjoyed it , but it went much better than I expected and my audience were very appreciative . 

  I suppose it was a sort of novelty lesson for them . 

  Anyway , I was congratulated once more and I realised for the first time that I was actually doing some good . 

  I was telling my own age group about something worthwhile : bird life and conservation . 

  It made me feel great -- so great that I agreed to do yet another lecture , this time in front of a full fourth-year assembly -- that's over a hundred kids ! 

  Oh God , what have I let myself in for , I said to myself that night . 

  When I did the first two talks , Dawn was not trained enough to fly , though on the second she did manage a short hop , but by the time this big lecture came along she was flying on the creance . 

  So I intended to try flying her for the assembly , and carefully got her down to her flying weight . 

  The event was to take place in the Music Room , which is a large round building quite separate from the main school and connected by three covered walkways . 

  It was just right : quiet , high-ceilinged , well lit , bit and airy . 

  ( The air can get rather ripe-smelling in an ordinary classroom , especially when I start opening up and passing round owl pellets to show my audience what she's been regurgitating ! ) 

  Well , when I arrived there they all were , sitting down waiting . 

  As soon as I entered the room I could hear little pockets of chatter coming from various parts of the audience . 

  I knew they were talking about me , and some of them were , pointing at Dawn . 

  It was really difficult to keep a straight face , but then Mr Taylor " introduced " us and I just forgot about my shyness and launched into my speech . 

  I'd already set up the perch , so I put Dawn on it as I spoke . 

  I was becoming an old hand by now ; I was not nearly as nervous as I had been the other times , even though the audience was twice the size . 

  The adrenaline was certainly pumping , but I realised it was just a matter of getting over those first few minutes . 

  I kept them interested for half an hour and now I cannot even remember what I said . 

  It was all off the top of my head . 

  I had some notes jotted down on a card somewhere , but I quickly went off them and chatted about whatever seemed interesting . 

  ( I've done dozens of lectures now , in front of all sorts of people , and I always make it up as I go along , although I suppose I must have a rough idea about what I am going to say . ) 

  When I thought I'd run out of things to say I asked the front two rows to move back and the whole place started buzzing . 

  It was Dawn's turn . 

  They knew I was going to attempt a display . 

  There was one kid , however , who did not move back as far as the rest of his row , so I politely asked him to get in line . 

  Well , there's always one . 

  I suppose he thought I was exaggerating the danger and he'd show how tough he was , so he moved his chair back about an inch . 

  I just shrugged and warned him to watch out , but he still did not take any notice . 

  It took me three or four minutes to coax Dawn into a short flight . 

  She overshot the glove and was pulled back by the creance . 

  The second time she picked up the lure and pulled up clumsily on my fist . 

  At this point I thought she might be distracted by the kid whose chair was sticking out , so I asked him for a second time to move back even further . 

  Reluctantly he moved back but was still sticking out slightly from the row . 

  I flew Dawn once more and this time she crashed down near this particular boy's feet . 

  The next moment she was running up his outstretched legs , then flapping up his sweater and finally she was sitting inelegantly on his head . 

  Everyone in the room burst out laughing -- even the teachers . 

  It was very comical , but the boy did not think So . 

  I shall never forget the expression on his face , it was like someone had shown him a ghost . 

  " Get her off -- it hurts ! " he whispered at me , not daring to move or make too much noise . 

  I knew Dawn's talons would be finding a good grip on his scalp . 

  Seeing as he'd been such a pain , I was a little slow going to his rescue . 

  I laughed , apologised to the audience and walked over to lift her off . 

  This was not easy either , because she was spooked and was clinging for dear life to the poor kid's hair . 

  Eventually I untangled them and muttered something to him about it having been a hair-raising experience ... 

  He was not amused , although I think his pride was hurt more than anything else , but he did move his chair this time -- right back into the second row ! 

  I then flew Dawn successfully three times , just to prove she could do it , and brought the show to a close to a great wave of applause . 

  I do not know how much they really enjoyed it , but judging by the expressions on their faces and the way they all went out talking about Dawn , I think it went down well . 

  I visited a few primary schools next . 

  Again it was word of mouth : teachers told other teachers about us and I was getting offers to give talks left , right and centre . 

  I went to Tintagel primary school a few months later . 

  By then Dawn was flying free , although she would not always come straight back to me . 

  We were in the sports hall and she flew right up on to the top of the climbing frame at the far end from where I was giving my little lecture . 

  All the kids found it highly amusing when I had to climb up and fetch her . 

  Then she flew on to a high window-sill and I had to ask the headmaster to bring me a ladder so that I could bring her down . 

  This was not part of the display , i hasten to add ! 

  Even when she crash-landed into the middle of them they found it funny . 

  They were really " wicked " , those little juniors . 

  With primary pupils you get a lot of really complicated questions , and sometimes really good ones too . 

  At one primary school I was asked a question that made the teacher look worried , and it baffled me . 

  Out of the corner of my eye , I could see Derek thinking , what's he going to say ? 

  A little nine-year-old had just asked me , " Jon , how do they do it ? " 

  I did not know what to say , but I'd been reading about mating in a book only a few days before , so I kept a perfectly straight face and replied . 

  " Well , they do it in the normal way usually . 

  But there is one bird -- an eagle , I think -- which actually does it in mid-air ... 

  Er , any more questions ? " 

  The teacher and Derek both sighed with relief and the kid just looked amazed , as if he was thinking , " What's he saying , I would not have thought of that ! " 

  On another occasion one child asked me why owls flew . 

  You just have to give a straight answer . 

  I said that owls could not run very fast and so they had to fly to catch mice , which could run fast . 

  Simple answers like this seem to delight younger kids , who demand a reason for everything . 

  But sometimes they ask things like , " Jon , how many owls are there in the world ? " 

  They expect you to know exactly how many there are , even the exact number of barn owls in the British Isles , right down to the last check . 

  You just have to say something like , " Not enough , " and admit you do not know . 

  It's a curious thing , but at the end of a talk when you say , " Any questions ? " , you do not get that much response from an audience . 

  But afterwards , when you're packing up and taking equipment out to the car , you suddenly find yourself surrounded by pupils and teachers firing questions at you . 

  I suppose people prefer to wait until most of the audience has gone . 

  These cosy chats often last longer than the lecture itself , but I do not mind . 

  Children have sometimes got personal things to say , like , " We've got owls in our barn " or " My uncle's got'em on his farm " or " What are they doing in my friend's shed ? " 

  So I ask them what the land's like , is there water ? 

  Does your dad use pesticides ? 

  Things like that . 

  It's surprising how little even these country kids know about owls , although they must see or hear them every day . 

  They learn a lot more at my talks , even though I am just going over the very basics of the subject . 

  It gets a little more difficult when eight-year-olds who've seen me handling Dawn wander up and say they're going to get a barn owl and train it . 

  Most of them think it's as easy as that and then I have to give them the " hard facts " about cost and time . 

  But -- although this is very rare -- you do sometimes come across one or two who seem to have a genuine interest and " feel " for the birds ; then , obviously , I try to give them all the advice and encouragement I can . 

  Sometimes these sophisticated nine-year-olds really do seem to have the bug but I still feel a bit uncomfortable encouraging them because they are so young . 

  I mean , I've had my interest virtually since I was in nappies , but I did not actually get a bird until I was thirteen . 

  So I try to put the younger ones off acquiring one until they're older . 

  They look disappointed , but I say study first , train later . 

  It's difficult . 

  I do not want to kill their dreams . 

  The whole point of giving talks is to educate young people ; tell them what's happening to our barn owl populations ; give them some simple biological background ; and talk about training . 

  I do not want to say , " Look , you're too young -- forget it . " 

  Those who have a real interest will leave it for a few years before attempting training . 

  Another problem with doing these talks is working out at what level I should pitch them for different age groups . 

  In the beginning Derek was always saying things like , " Do not talk about that " , " Talk more about this " , or " They will not want to hear about that . " 

  But I am the one who has to stand up out there and do it , and so while I take his point I have to find the right levels for myself . 

  It's all trial and error , really . 

  For example , I am careful about using certain words , like " frequency " , with younger audiences , when I am telling them about the owl's unusual " lopsided " hearing . 

  Some things are very tricky to explain . 

  You can plan grand lectures , but in the end you really do learn by doing them over and over again , adjusting this or changing that . 

  You soon sense if your audience is with you and taking in what you're saying . 

  The worst age group for me is my own , because I sometimes think they see me as a bit of a know-it-all . 

  Well , I might know about owls but I would not claim to know much about anything else . 

  I remember I did a talk at Rudolf Steiner , a private school in Devon , to a group my own age and it went really well , so there are exceptions . 

  I did make a big mistake there , though . 

  I thought one long-haired kid was a girl but she was a he ! 

  Derek cracked up , but I was dumbstruck -- super embarrassed -- for about thirty seconds , and went as red as a radish . 

  Another time I went to St Kew primary , which is really small and right out in the middle of nowhere , and they made me feel really welcome . 

  That happens a lot , but St Kew was special . 

  It was raining cats and dogs and the teachers were running in and out helping us get our stuff in and just could not do enough for us . 

  It's great to be appreciated . 

  The teacher who'd invited us down proved very useful in helping us to locate release sites , too . 

  The children had brought in a number of dead barn owls , so there was already a bit interest . 

  We were there all morning and had a wonderful time . 

  The teacher invited us round to his cottage one evening for dinner and to talk about releasing owls into the wild , which we had just started doing around that time ( I shall tell you more about that later ) . 

  The next day he even drove us out to some local farms in his Land Rover to assess their suitability . 

  So doing the lectures not only benefits the children , it also makes me valuable contacts , as well as building up my confidence ; I never had much of that until I started training Dawn . 

  I can honestly say that every audience I've ever had has been very good , except , perhaps , for a school for the mentally handicapped we visited once where one or two started turning round and talking whilst I was speaking . 

  They were not being deliberately rude -- it was just hard for them to concentrate . 

  They were definitely interested , though . 

  It was quite funny really and I enjoyed it very much . 

  As I said , I've done dozens of talks now at various schools , but one that sticks in my mind is a private preparatory school for girls in Tavistock , where I was received like some sort of pop star ! 

  There'd been something in the local papers about me and my work , and these girls , aged about eight to eleven years old , sent me a book of poems they'd written , printed and sold to raise money . 

  The poems were all about owls and me ! 

  They'd raised 35 and sent it to me to put towards my conservation work . 

  I was really touched , speechless . 

  So on our way to the Rudolf Steiner school we called in unannounced to say hello and thank you . 

  You cannot imagine how excited these sweet little girls were when they saw me and Dawn coming into their school . 

  They went wild and made us promise to come back and give a display , so a few weeks later we returned and gave them the whole show . 

  It was amazing . 

  I shall never forget their hospitality and generosity . 

  At lunch time Derek and I almost caused a riot in the dining hall , because between us we could obviously only sit at two tables at once and every table wanted us to sit with them . 

  There just was not enough of us to go round ! 

  It was hilarious . 

  By the time we'd got out of there I'd received two " love letters " from a couple of nine-year-olds and pocketfuls of poems and drawings . 

  Derek really gave me some stick about my " fan club , on the way home in the car ; he told my mum everything , and she had a good laugh , too . 

  But it was just a delightful experience . 

  It's hard to describe how nice everybody was to us at that school . 

  A few weeks later I had a letter from them , saying another man had visited them with a barn owl , but it was not as good as Dawn . 

  I felt very proud of her and read her the letter . 

  As soon as I've got some suitable breeding pairs I am going to go back there . 

  I hope they read this book and realise how happy they made me feel . 

  Although I am still nervous at the thought of doing a talk in front of strangers , once I get going I enjoy every minute of it . 

  The places I've been and people I've met have given me the confidence to carry on . 

  I do not claim to be an expert and I certainly do not consider myself a clever clogs . 

  I am just someone who's into what he's doing . 

  I simply love it . 

  I sometimes think back to that first talk I did in Mr Taylor's class , and how scared I was . 

  I owe Mr Taylor a lot . 

  At the time I just wanted to be left alone , but now I am glad he pressured me into doing more talks . 

  It had never occurred to me that so many people would be interested in me and Dawn . 

  It shows you how wrong you can be , and what you can do if you fight your fear and try . 

  You might say I was learning to fly free , just like Dawn . 

  The Falconry Course 

  " Beware the falconer with the clean glove , " they say , and certainly I was looking forward to getting my glove dirty -- at least metaphorically -- with some practical experience when I booked myself on a falconry course on Bodmin Moor in the summer of 1988 . 

  I was still in the middle of training Dawn and she had just started to fly free . 

  As I've said before , falconry has always fascinated me , and I hope I am going to be able to make my living at it one day . 

  The course was important to me for several reasons . 

  I wanted to learn as much as possible about different birds . 

  People who do not know what they're doing can kill birds of prey -- their weight is very delicately balanced , as you've seen from the trouble I had finding the right flying weight for Dawn . 

  A kestrel is even smaller than a barn owl -- it may only weigh six to seven ounces , and could easily lose a quarter of an ounce overnight in cold weather because of the energy it uses up trying to maintain its body heat . 

  That's the equivalent of a medium-sized man losing half a stone overnight , and it could be fatal for a bird . 

  So it's vital to understand just what the right weight is , and how to feed a bird to keep it fit but well fed . 

  I also knew that experience in working with other birds would be useful to me in the long term . 

  Sooner or later I want to acquire the full range of British birds of prey , and the next bird I hope to work with is a goshawk . 

  They're quite easy to train and hunt a variety of prey from small birds to pheasants and hares , which makes them interesting to work with . 

  They have a tendency to be temperamental , but it would be good experience . 

  The main reason I became involved in birds of prey was to teach them to hunt for me -- and of course for themselves -- so a goshawk is a must for the near future . 

  At the time I did the course I was still very inexperienced , and inclined to be impatient with Dawn's training . 

  Dawn had at first been reluctant to get off my glove , so I'd developed the habit of swinging my arm with the wind , hoping to encourage her to fly . 

  I'd read about this technique in my books , but it was only when I did the course that I realised that , although it would work for sparrowhawks and most other hunting birds , Dawn's hunting did not depend on speed . 

  So instead of being encouraged , she was being buffeted about and becoming distressed . 

  Now I know that if I hold my arm up but keep it still she has the benefit of the updraught and will open her wings and take off . 

  I arrived bright and early at Brian the falconer's house for day one of my course . 

  Derek had come along too , to keep me company and because he fancied the idea of hunting with hawks . 

  For me it meant more than that . 

  It was the fulfilment of another personal goal I had set myself . 

  So far I'd acquired all my know-how about birds of prey from books and first-hand experience . 

  Now it was time to extend my knowledge with the help of a professional falconer . 

  It was a necessary part of my education . 

  After we'd sat and talked in Brian's kitchen for a while , we were taken through to the falconry part of the house . 

  It was a large room , an Aladdin's cave to any would-be falconer , filled with expensive-looking equipment : bags and lures hanging from walls , jesses and leashes all laid out in immaculate order . 

  Right at the back , sitting stony-eyed on a perch , was a large buzzard . 

  Our eyes met and all the while we were sitting down discussing what we had to do and how we were going to go about it over the four days of the course , my gaze kept returning to the sour-faced buzzard . 

  If looks could kill ... 

  I tried to stare him out . 

  Soon I shall be handling that magnificent specimen , I thought . 

  I longed to feel the great buzzard's weight on my fist . 

  Jon ? 

  Are you still with us ? " 

  Brian broke in . 

  " Er , um , yes , Brian . 

  That buzzard , is he ... ? " 

  " Pay attention . " 

  This induction session lasted about three-quarters of an hour , and then Brian took us outside , past the ever-watchful buzzard . 

  " Come on , Jon ! " called Brian . 

  Derek laughed . 

  " He's in another world , " he said . 

  We all donned gloves and picked up a couple of Harris's hawks . 

  These are handsome , rusty brown birds with a remarkably amicable disposition for a bird of prey , though they can catch a rabbit or a bird as large as a heron with ease . 

  They are excellent for both hunting and demonstration flying , but unfortunately they are not common in Britain , being native to the USA and South America . 

  Although they are good birds for many beginners , they cost about 700 , which makes them too expensive for all but the most dedicated . 

  They will fly to strange people in strange places as long as there is food about , because they are much more interested in food than in anything that may be going on around them . 

  When hunting , they fly hard and fast , but a trained bird will never go too far from the falconer and the promise of more food . 

  One day , when I can afford it , I'd love to have two Harris's hawks -- one for hunting and one for demonstration . 

  One of the most exciting things you can do with Harris's hawks is what's called " flying a cast " . 

  That means flying two or more after the same rabbit . 

  In the wild , Harrises work together , with perhaps two on the ground bolting rabbits out of their holes ready for those in the sky to pounce on them . 

  Merlins will also hunt together , three or four of them chasing the same group of skylarks . 

  Most other birds of prey will fight if there's more than one chasing the same prey . 

  " We will walk up to that hill top , " said Brian , pointing to some fields beyond his land . 

  " Take it slowly . " 

  Along the way Brian talked to us the whole time , not in a loud voice or a whisper , but in a low confident tone , the kind every good falconer adopts when he's in the presence of birds of prey . 

  He was just pointing out little do's and do not's that might not have occurred to the eager amateur . 

  He demonstrated , for example , how to navigate your way over an obstacle like a gate , without disturbing the bird . 

  This is a tricky exercise , but easier if you keep your glove at arm level , shield the bird from the wind with your body , and do not try to jump down the last foot or two , and so jar the bird . 

  What we were doing was a half-hour walkabout to accustom us to the feel of the birds . 

  We did not even attempt to fly them , although they were " bating " in the wind . 

  Brian and I just discussed different techniques and what have you . 

  He knew that I had some experience , but I think he was trying to make me relax and , perhaps , find out just how much I did or did not know . 

  Then we returned to the house . 

  We all sat down together again and chatted in general about falconry , and in particular about equipment and how to put it on correctly ; how to hold the bird properly ; different methods of training a bird ; the various illnesses and complaints they suffer from and how to cure them ; and simply how to take good care of birds . 

  I noticed that over the four days Brian expanded on these subjects . 

  Day One we talked a lot about equipment and its use ; on the second day about how to handle the birds , and on Day Three Brian went into more detail about care and treatment . 

  Day four ... well , that was something else -- I shall tell you later . 

  Obviously I was learning new things all the time and each day we built on what we had learned the day before . 

  It was fascinating . 

  The equivalent , I suppose , of someone who loves chocolate falling into a big vat of the stuff and unhurriedly eating their way out ! 

  I was in my element , immersing myself in all the terms falconers use and studying Brian's vast collection of equipment , some of it quite old and valuable , but in immaculate condition , like his birds . 

  Apart from the Harris's hawks , we did not get a chance to pick up any more birds until late on the second day . 

  We were too busy threading jesses and trying out the equipment . 

  Of course , I already had some experience with the various falconers' knots and changing jesses with a bird perched on my fist , but poor old Derek got himself a bit tied up . 

  He patched through it somehow , though . 

  We must have covered just about everything over those four days , from carrying boxes and travelling with birds to ferreting to keep them fed . 

  Brian was always keen to stress that the comfort and wellbeing of the birds was of the utmost importance . 

  The bird must always come first , he would tell us over and over again . 

  " What time's lunch ? " 

  Derek would ask , looking at his watch and lighting another cigarette . 

  " I am thirsty . " 

  Naturally , the best bit from my point of view was actually carrying the birds and working with them . 

  On the afternoon of the second day , we put one of the Harris's hawks on a creance , as we would have if we had been training it , and tried a spot of flying . 

  The poor creature must have wondered what was going on , as it was already fully airworthy ! 

  We had to fix the unfortunate bird to the creance , place it on its perch in a field , pay out the long line , walk to the place where we wanted it to fly to and hold our gloved hands out with a piece of meat . 

  As we strolled away , however , we had to hold our hands out at arm's length , as if we were under arrest , to show the hawk that we were not holding a juicy lump of rabbit . 

  Otherwise he'd have been down the line after us like a shot . 

  Once we were the desired distance away we had to stand perfectly still , reach slowly into our pockets for the food , turn side-on to the bird , look back at it over our shoulders and wiggle the meat . 

  Brian's hawks came for it straightaway . 

  No problem . 

  But Derek and I both made mistakes at first ; simple things really , such as accidentally standing on the creance just as the bird came across , so that the poor thing got dumped . 

  But these birds were , as I said , fully trained and could recover from such humiliating blunders by their inexperienced handlers . 

  If you were trying to train one from scratch and made an error like that it could easily mess up an entire day's work . 

  After each flight we were picked up on little points , such as our positioning or the way we were holding the glove : too high or too low , the wrong angle . 

  One big mistake I made , being used to handling Dawn , was trying to walk the hawk all the way back to its perch . 

  With trained hawks like these , that's like a mother trying to put her teenaged son in a shopping trolley at the local supermarket ! 

  They were perfectly capable of going back to the perch without my help . 

  Normally , with Dawn , I would just walk straight towards the perch , but these Harris's hawks were really eager , and bated immediately the breeze got in their feathers ; that is , they tried to take off and fly back on their own . 

  They could not be allowed to do this , because they were still attached to the creance and might get themselves caught up round the perch . 

  The solution must have looked quite funny to an onlooker . 

  Picture Derek , or me , walking backwards across a field towards a perch , hawk on glove , trying desperately with our bodies to block the sight of the perch from the alert hawk's vision . 

  The hawk's head would be bobbing and swivelling , trying to find out what on earth was going on . 

  Not until we were a few yards away from the perch could we turn , hold our arms out and release the jesses so that the bird could fly the rest of the way . 

  We soon got the hang of this ; though it felt like we were performing a weird new dance . 

  The main thing was that we were picking up a lot of hawking know-how , even if we did look ridiculous . 

  One of the most enjoyable aspects of the course was the lunch we had in the local pub , which did a particularly memorable steak and kidney pie . 

  ( Derek heartily spoke up for the bitter they pulled , too . ) 

  I had the pie two days on the trot , it was mouthwateringly tasty . 

  I would have had another one on the third day as well , but I gave it up for the opportunity to go rabbiting with the lad who worked for Brian . 

  Hungry hawks have to be fed , and so a constant supply of fresh meat must be found . 

  The answer is to trap rabbits with ferrets . 

  I had never done this before and was curious to find out exactly how it was done . 

  So I left Derek and Brian by the door of the pub and headed for the open country . 

  I was gone for about three hours : scrambling through hedges ; rummaging in undergrowth ; wrestling with tangled nets ; and throwing into a box the indignant ferrets , who after all had done all the work and only wanted to wring the rabbits' necks . 

  For anyone who has never gone " a-rabbiting " , I must say I thoroughly enjoyed it . 

  Basically , you find a warren , cover a few holes with netting , send your ferrets down and wait . 

  This was exciting enough , but little did I know that after noon how much more exciting hunting rabbits with a hawk could be . 

  I was soon to find out . 

  The days of our falconry course had a set pattern . 

  First we would sit down and plan out our day ; second , we'd decide what we expected to get out of each day , in terms of knowledge and experience ; third , we'd go to work , and , finally , we'd meet back at the house in the late afternoon . 

  These end-of-day meetings were very important , for it was then that we reviewed our progress , comparing our morning's expectations with the fruits of our labours . 

  Had we done this ? 

  Could we say that we had handled that well ? 

  What did not we do ? 

  What had we gained ? 

  In this thorough , methodical way we missed out very little indeed . 

  A fascinating new thing I learned during these sessions was " feather care " , which , of course , comes under the general heading of the bird's health and safety . 

  It's amazing what you learn . 

  I would never have dreamed of doing what Brian demonstrated to us with broken or damaged feathers . 

  You can actually repair or replace feathers , at least primary and secondary ones ( the larger wing and tail feathers ) , by some very ingenious methods . 

  I knew about splicing a broken feather back together , but I did not know about renovating bent ones . 

  To splice a feather back together , after a bird has flown into a barbed wire fence , say , or been in a fight , you have to cut off the damaged feather about NN to JJ inch from the base , take a similar feather from a dead bird and cut it to fit . 

  The quick way to do the repair is to break the point off a needle , dab a bit of glue on the now blunt end and work that into the base or stem of the feather , being careful not to pierce the flesh . 

  Then you gently and gradually work the new feather on , positioning it to match the original plumage as best you can . 

  Do not let the bird preen for at least half an hour or it will just pull the feather out . 

  This arrangement will not last forever because the needle is too smooth and the feather will slip away from it . 

  The more permanent solution is to use a piece of cane or a cocktail stick instead -- this should last until the feather moults naturally . 

  Obviously it's nice if you can match the colour of the feathers , but a friend of mine had a peregrine that was caught in a bush during a storm , and the only feathers available to effect the repair came from a jackdaw . 

  As almost an entire wing had to be replaced , the peregrine ended up black along one side . 

  This confused bird-watchers , but the bird itself was fine . 

  I've never had to perform this operation . 

  Dawn has never bent or broken a feather in two and a half years . 

  Kestrels are very prone to tail damage -- they have quite a long tail for the size of the bird and in training a leash rubbing against it can snap feathers . 

  When a kestrel I was looking after died recently , I put it in the freezer so that I can use it for " spares " if necessary . 

  I loved the way Brian repaired a bent feather . 

  Say a bird has gone after a rabbit and landed awkwardly and got one of its deck feathers ( a pair of prominent feathers found in the tail ) buckled . 

  How do you straighten it out again ? 

  You get a bowl of boiling water and , holding the bird firmly , plunge the bent feather under , making sure , of course , that the scalding water does not touch the bird's skin . 

  This makes the hollow stem go rubbery for a few seconds , but then it just stiffens up straight as it cools . 

  Another interesting technique we learned was how to attach the tail-bell on a kestrel or a falcon . 

  What you do is join the bell to the two middle , or deck , feathers with a strip of leather , threaded with a bell . 

  ( Hawks wear bells for the same reason as mountain cattle -- so you can hear them when you cannot see them . ) 

  If you do this awkwardly the bird will obviously be unable to flex open its tail -- they do not much anyway , because the deck feathers are the support feathers , like the middle fingers of a human hand . 

  The rest of the tail feathers are more manoeuvrable . 

  But if you restrict the movement too firmly the bird will feel uncomfortable . 

  How should you place a hood on a bird ? 

  What are the different lures for ? 

  All these questions were dealt with fully during the course , so Derek and I felt that we had learnt a great deal of new and fascinating information that we just could not have got out of books . 

  I am not saying you cannot read about these things , but you have to have " hands on " experience to appreciate the subtleties of falconry properly . 

  The course would have been incomplete if it had only been about these technical matters , fascinating as they are . 

  When I look back on it all , the fourth and last day has to be the most exciting and memorable . 

  We were taken hunting with a Harris's hawk . 

  ABOVE Inside the local quarry -- the owls probably like the peace and quiet , and the leaf litter is full of mice and insects . 

  BELOW The floor of the quarry is littered with pellets and feathers . 

  ABOVE The hay barn on a friend's farm . 

  Barn owls used to breed in the hay bales but when these were shifted the birds objected and moved off to the nearby quarry . 

  My friend wanted to encourage them to come back , so we put the bales back where they had been and cut a suitable owl-sized hole in the wall . 

  The owls are often seen outside the barn first thing in the morning , and they nip into the hay when disturbed . 

  We hope they will breed in the barn again this year . 

  RIGHT Barn owl eggs in a typical nest . 

  The number of chicks in a clutch varies according to the availability of food and the danger of predators . 

  From any clutch it's possible that one or two would not hatch , and if food was short a little chick might be killed by an elder sibling ( or by its mother so that the stronger chick would survive ) . 

  Two or three chicks surviving is about average for wild birds . 

  When releasing barn owls that have been in captivity for a long time , we keep them confined to the barn until we're sure that they are going to adapt happily to their new surrounding . ( ) 

  LEFT A portrait of Zara , my kestrel . 

  Kestrels are popular with audiences at lectures , because they're elegant little birds and also because , of all the British birds of prey , they're the ones people are most likely to spot in the wild : they hover over motorways and are even seen in towns these days . 

  ABOVE Petite , my little owl . 

  Eight and a half inches tall and bad tempered with it . 

  She tends to react badly to lots of people -- it's a sort of stress that is common in older birds -- so I do not take her to lectures any more . 

  I'd like to breed from her when I have a bit more space . 

  Dawn and me , just as I am about to fly her . 

  I do not care what anyone says , there's no barn owl in the world like her . 

  We arrived as keen as a couple of puppies out for their first walkies , full of fun and raring to go ! 

  Brian had to calm us down . 

  Of course , we knew roughly what was in store for us , but it exceeded what we'd imagined . 

  The last day had been set aside for a hunting trip , a full day out in the field , putting into practice , hopefully , all we had learned . 

  We got there a quarter of an hour early , around nine in the morning . 

  The sky was clear and blue with not a cloud even in the west . 

  Perfect weather . 

  Within the hour we'd prepared all the equipment and stored the Harris's hawk in the back of the Land Rover , and we were on our way . 

  ( We also took a goshawk in case the Harris's did not work , but did not have to fly him . ) 

  We'd decided to drive up high on to Bodmin Moor , to a remote farm Brian knew . 

  Derek rode up front with Brian , and I ( where else ? ) cheerfully climbed in the back with the birds . 

  When we reached the farm the track ran out , so we had a word with the farmer , a friend of Brian's , and set off over the open fields . 

  We'd already spotted several rabbits scampering about . 

  The hawks , hooded and boxed up , brooding , sensing where they were being taken and why , were getting agitated , clicking their tongues and fidgeting . 

  The sense of anticipation was almost unbearable . 

  When Brian braked I was first out of the Land Rover . 

  The Harris's hawk was brought out and took up his position on his master's fist , coldly surveying the land . 

  Nothing stirred . 

  Derek stumbled off into the nearest clump of vegetation and disturbed three petrified rabbits . 

  He got the fright of his life , for the Harris's was at them like a bullet , and he was in the way ! 

  The rabbits got clean away . 

  As we proceeded we kept our eyes skinned and whenever we came to a thicket or undergrowth we beat it with our sticks to stir up the prey . 

  Meanwhile , the magnificent Harris's looked on menacingly . 

  Well , we did not have much luck out in the open because the rabbits saw or heard or smelt us coming a mile off and bolted down the nearest hole , even though we were mute and trying to stay down wind ( the wind kept switching direction in little gusts ) . 

  But we had a few other cards up our sleeves we were waiting to play : we'd brought two furry friends along with us . 

  We were just looking for a suitable warren to send our ferrets down to flush out the occupants . 

  Bald eagle 

  We did not have to look far before we found a hollow in the corner of a field , riddled with holes and scattered with fresh earth and droppings . 

  We ended up spending half the day around the area , putting our ferrets down holes and bolting rabbits . 

  In all we had twelve chases . 

  A rabbit would surface and immediately make a bolt for the closest hole when he sensed the hawk . 

  Though not , of course , the one he'd just come up because the ferret was still down there in hot pursuit . 

  Then the hawk would flash down on him . 

  The whole sequence was over in seconds , but it was breathtaking . 

  You would think that these rabbits would have no chance against the combined land and air assaults of ferrets and hawk , but they were incredibly fast and usually disappeared down a safe hole before our Harris's could get hold of them , even though the Harris's hawk moves like lightning . 

  What really amazed me was the way the hawk seemed to know out of which hole the rabbit was going to pop even before its ears appeared . 

  It was as if the hawk could hear the rabbit running along the tunnels inside the hedge , while he was sitting on a post on top of the hedge . 

  The Harris's expressionless eyes would follow the invisible prey and then fix on its exit . 

  It was uncanny and more than a little unnerving to watch : the perfect hunter at work . 

  Whether he could actually do this or not I do not know . 

  I only know that it was remarkable that he could react so swiftly and swoop down round the rabbit's ears . 

  Anyway , we did not have much luck in the hollow either , so we moved further up the field . 

  Now Derek and I were on one side of the hedge , stuffing the ferrets down , and Brian was positioned on the other , with the bird , waiting for the evicted rabbits . 

  I remember one near thing when one scrambled out and ran for some sixty feet along the hedge , pursued instantly by the low-flying hawk . 

  Be managed to elude our bird because he was running inside a wire retaining fence and so could not be grabbed by the deadly talons . 

  That was one lucky rabbit . 

  It was really frustrating for the hawk -- cries of anguish spat from his tongue . 

  A while later we were across the other side of the hill , trying another hedge . 

  Same plan , only this time we all retreated back some thirty feet so that the wily rabbits would not pick up our scent , to give the bird a chance . 

  Bingo ! 

  Our first successful chase . 

  The Harris's gripped like a vice and screeched with delight . 

  Well , by the end of the day this proved to be our only catch , but we were all three pleased with the day's work . 

  Personally I could not have cared less if we had not caught a single rabbit . 

  It was worth all the effort just to see the bird do its stuff , and enjoy the indescribable thrill of so many chases . 

  Hunting rabbits with hawks is surely better than blowing their brains out with shotguns . 

  After all , the hawks do actually eat what they catch and you can see how hard the hawk has to work just to get one square meal . 

  It's animal against animal , one on one , which is how it should be . 

  But hawking is labour-intensive and time-consuming and hardly a satisfactory way of keeping rabbit populations down . 

  Rabbits breed like rabbits , you know . 

  Oh , yes , I never did get a chance to fly that big buzzard . 

  I wonder if he would have had any joy that day ... only if you tied the rabbits' legs together , I expect . 

  Returning to the Wild 

  I first became involved with releasing barn owls into the wild about two years ago , shortly after i got my first breeding pair , Barny and Mrs Barny . 

  The plight of barn owls , the destruction of their habitat and declining numbers were starting to get more and more media coverage . 

  They were rapidly becoming an endangered species . 

  Nobody really knows how many barn owls there are left in this country , but various factors have contributed to their decline . 

  The most obvious is that habitats are being destroyed . 

  Barn owls need barns or similar buildings for breeding , and more and more of them are being converted into country houses . 

  An awful lot has been written about the destruction of the hedgerows , but it really does damage the ecology . 

  Barn owls' favourite prey are short-tailed voles , which live in hedgerows along the sides of roads . 

  As hedgerows become rarer , voles have fewer places to live , and as more roads are built crisscrossing the countryside , they stand more risk of being killed by passing cars . 

  Cornwall is luckier than most parts of England in this respect -- it's been left alone more than other counties , and lots of applications for planning permission have been turned down . 

  So it's still a pretty good wildlife area -- and we must try to keep it that way . 

  Pesticides have had a damaging effect on a lot of wildlife , including birds of prey , but for some reason this does not seem to have affected barn owls as much as the sparrowhawk and peregrine populations . 

  Barn owls are susceptible to bad weather , though , because a hard winter can kill their food supply even if they resist the cold themselves . 

  The last very hard winter we had , in 1978-79 , was followed by a noticeable dearth of barn owls . 

  As I became aware of this , I wondered what could be done to prevent barn owl numbers declining still further . 

  What could I do ? 

  I love these birds . 

  I must do something , I thought , so I rang up a friend of mine called David Woolcock . 

  He works at Paradise Park , the sort of bird zoo near Penzance I mentioned earlier . 

  I had some faint ideas about releasing , but David was able to give me some valuable advice on how to go about it . 

  The first pair we actually released were not ones we had reared . 

  They came into my hands in a rather distressing , but all too familiar , way . 

  A friend of ours , John Pennington , had a farm and campsite near the coast and owned a barn . 

  A mile or so away , there was another barn , a bit more dilapidated , but barn owls do not mind that . 

  They like barns because they provide lots of cover and camouflage -- they are not as resilient as tawny owls , and need more protection from the elements . 

  Ideally , the building should be isolated , so that they can breed in peace . 

  There had been a pair using this barn , but , as so often happens these days , they deserted their nest . 

  The barn was on a main road , and it seems likely that one of the adults was killed and the other went off in search of another mate . 

  This is not unusual , particularly if it's the female who's killed , as the male would not feed the young -- that's always the mother's job . 

  So Derek and I were called in . 

  When we got there we found dead or starving owlets all over the place . 

  It was heart-breaking . 

  We managed to save three with Maureen Edwards's help and between us we nursed them back to health . 

  From these three I took a pair who seemed to get along , for my first release . 

  What better place to release them than their own territory ? 

  There was no advantage in taking them back to the barn where they'd been born , as when we found them they were too young ever to have been out of it , so would not have known their way around . 

  But their parents had obviously thought it was a suitable area . 

  As the original barn was quite difficult to get to , I asked John Pennington if I could use his . 

  He was delighted . 

  Derek and I drove down there and shut off the whole barn , preventing all means of getting in or out . 

  Then we put a box on one of the high window-sills . 

  It was just an ordinary two-floor barn with a ladder from the ground up to the hay loft . 

  The only other way in or out of this upper level was a door for loading bales and what have you . 

  Anyway , we nailed our box to the wall and propped up the front with a piece of wood , to make it stable enough to support the weight of our two owls . 

  Then we wired it over . 

  We positioned it so that it faced away from the doorway , to avoid draughts and to give the future inhabitants a little privacy . 

  Next we searched the entire barn for anything sharp -- nails sticking out of the walls , for example -- that might cut or harm them . 

  You might think we were being a bit over-cautious , but these were two very young and inexperienced owls we were releasing . 

  They could get quite boisterous and reckless , especially during the early days , when they would be shut in for a while . 

  When we were satisfied that all the holes in the walls , main door , loft door and roof were sealed up , and nothing could get in or out , we turned our attention to the exterior . 

  First we checked what the food supplies were like in the area simply by looking at what the local cats were bringing in . 

  The farmer and his neighbours were all friends so it was just a case of asking them to keep an eye on their moggies , and spying on a few of the plumper-looking ones -- successful hunters , we assumed . 

  There turned out to be plenty of field mice and short-tailed shrews , various larger insects and the odd rat about , so we concluded that there was more than enough food in the vicinity to sustain our pair . 

  After we'd satisfied ourselves that there was sufficient prey I went off to walk the terrain . 

  It turned out there were a few acres of good hunting land just to the south of the barn . 

  There was also a fairly large stream nearby . 

  And that was not all . 

  The fields round the campsite were nice and open and had very good verges , where , of course , most of the owls' prey would be living . 

  Often the verges had been left to grow wild and bushy . 

  It was a perfect example of what the destruction of our hedgerows would mean to all wildlife -- they are the very arteries of nature . 

  Just to the north of the barn , some sixty yards or so away , were the cliffs and the land thereabouts was overgrown with ferns . 

  Perfect habitat for our barn owls' prey to feed and reproduce in . 

  The only road was a quarter of a mile away up a track , leading down to the campsite itself , so that made the immediate area pretty safe . 

  The last thing I wanted was for some motorist to hit one of my owls just when it was establishing itself . 

  A mile along this road was Rocky Valley , which is also a good hunting ground for birds of prey -- not necessarily for barn owls , with all the buzzards and kestrels competing , but no doubt our pair would venture over there at some time to see what they could pick up . 

  So everything seemed okay : the barn was secure , the food supply was better than good and the terrain near perfect . 

  The next stage , of course , was to bring the birds in . 

  As you can see , it is not just a case of opening a wicker basket and saying " shoo , like releasing racing pigeons : you have to find the owls a home . 

  You may be wondering why we wired over the box we installed in the barn . 

  Well , when you release you have to do it in stages , so when we introduced the owls to their new home from the aviary we limited their freedom to the box itself at first . 

  Then we asked John Pennington to drop their food in through the wire , mornings and evenings . 

  In this way we acclimatised them to the sights , sounds and smells around them in the barn . 

  At the end of a week of this captivity Derek and I dropped by to check on their welfare . 

  They seemed to be doing fine , but just to be on the safe side we gave them another four days to adapt . 

  Then we removed the wire from the front of the box and started feeding them on the ledge . 

  They were now confined to the inside of the barn . 

  We had to be careful when we called round to feed them , though , in case they flew out when we opened the door . 

  It still was not time to let them come and go as they pleased . 

  Actually we were not too happy with the back of the old barn , because although we'd tried to plug up every hole in the stonework , it was still possible for a determined young owl to squeeze out here and there . 

  Therefore we screened off the whole rear of the loft with wire and blankets , and anything else we could lay our hands on . 

  It was either t is or rebuild the barn , and our budget did not run to barn renovation -- even for our precious owls ! 

  The occupants of this very undesirable residence with no mod . cons . were gobbling their way through two chicks a day each , which we continued to feed to them on the ledge , right near their box , every morning and late afternoon . 

  Now and then we would feed them twice this number of mice , just to vary their diet . 

  This was tedious work , involving , as you can imagine , a great deal of toing and froing on our part . 

  But it would all be worth it to see them settled and thriving in their new home . 

  I must say Mr Pennington was very co-operative . 

  He went in and fed them for us sometimes , to give us a break , and would phone us up if he thought there were any difficulties . 

  We were going down there every day if possible , or every other day at least . 

  This went on for well over a month , with the owls flying free in the barn , until we were sure they were confident and happy in their surroundings . 

  When they first started coming out of the box they would just sit wherever they happened to land after stretching their wings . 

  But as time went on they began returning to the box , which was what we wanted them to do . 

  Now we knew they had accepted the box as their home and would probably come back to it even if they were allowed out in the open . 

  So we dismantled the screen over the window and let them fly around the back of the barn . 

  Next we opened up the loading door . 

  They could now come and go whenever they liked . 

  We kept putting food on the ledge for them and they would go out for relatively short flights and then return . 

  But after two weeks of going back and fro to the barn they finally decided for some unknown reason that they had had enough . 

  They just took off and left for good . 

  It happened one night when Derek and I were down there . 

  We were standing in the loft , watching them flying over the fields for half an hour , until darkness fell and we lost sight of them in the gloom . 

  The next morning there was no sign of them . 

  It was their first major flight away from the barn , and of course we did not know then it was to be their last . 

  We half expected them to come back a few days later , but they have never returned to the barn we prepared so painstakingly for them , although they are still sometimes seen in the vicinity . 

  They are , however , living close by and were last spotted further up the valley , where they have taken residence in another barn ! 

  Well , that's barn owls for you . 

  Obviously Mr Pennington's barn did not suit -- perhaps they objected to the campers . 

  It does not matter -- they're in the wild and breeding successfully , I am pleased to say , and that's all that matters . 

  Even as recently as this summer , for old time's sake , perhaps , one of them was seen hanging round the campsite . 

  The area was clearly suitable , so at least we got something right . 

  Around this time I had three young ready for release from my original pair , Barny and Mrs Barny . 

  I took them down to Paradise Park for sexing . 

  It's not easy to distinguish the sex of a young bird . 

  You have to take them to an expert to be sure . 

  Well , two of these Barny offspring -- they were lucky to be alive , for Mr and Mrs Barny were just about the most brutal parents any owl could be unfortunate enough to have -- were paired with Paradise Park birds and remained behind . 

  But the third was also paired up and came home with me . 

  Now I had a pair who were not from the same parents and who seemed fairly suited . 

  At least they were not tearing each other's feathers out . 

  ( I was keen to strain some of the vicious Barny's blood out of any future little owlets , so that they would not grow up to take after their grandfather ! ) 

  Anyway , I kept them in the aviary for about four weeks just to make sure they would adapt to one another . 

  Then it was time to put them out . 

  By now I had a long list of prospective release sites and sound experience behind me , so things went pretty much according to plan . 

  I find out about these release sites in various ways : through friends or volunteers or the farming parents of children I had lectured to , who have expressed an interest in having a pair and have suitable land . 

  And the list is growing . 

  So I was able to release these two successfully , and had the satisfaction of knowing that they approved of the site I'd chosen . 

  I get my owls in various ways , too . 

  Many releasings are really re-releasings , that is owls from broken homes , like the first pair , or injured owls I've nursed back to health and paired up . 

  That first year there seemed to be a lot of these about . 

  In the summer we received a phone call from a lady living up on Davidstow , which is a level stretch of moorland below Roughtor and Brown Willy , the high points of Bodmin Moor . 

  She was worried about a pair of wild barn owls : they had been nesting in her barn for years and she knew there were young up there , but had not seen the parent birds going in and out for several days . 

  So Derek and I went to investigate . 

  We drove out straight away with a bagful of food . 

  As soon as we arrived we were shown a dead chick . 

  What would we find in the loft ? 

  The only way we could get up to the nest was to borrow a ladder from a neighbouring farmer and climb up . 

  With heavy heart , fearing the worst , I felt round in the cold nest . 

  Nothing . 

  The barn floor below was covered in strands of hay and there was an old baler parked in the middle . 

  After an hour of feeling around on our hands and knees , sadly , we found another dead chick . 

  Next we looked outside in the field where the barn owner had discovered the other dead owlet , and found two more , both dead . 

  By now we had been there several hours and things were not looking very optimistic . 

  There did not seem much point in searching for more corpses . 

  We were ready to leave but the lady insisted that we keep looking , she was convinced there were more . 

  Then Derek had a bright idea : why not look inside the baler ? 

  It was an old thing with spikes and flaps which you could lift up and down to get at the mechanics . 

  Derek lifted up one of these squeaky casings and there , sitting in a row on an oily shaft , were three baby barn owls . 

  They were close to starvation and -- typical of barn owls when they're frightened -- they sat as stiff as dummies , not making a sound . 

  They must have fallen from the loft and hopped inside , and touched something in there that brought the rusty flap crashing down to entomb them . 

  Another day and they'd have been as dead as doornails . 

  I wriggled down underneath the contraption and found a fourth , barely alive . 

  This one eventually died , but I am delighted to say that , with Maureen's assistance , the other three all survived . 

  Maureen showed me how to insert food down their throats to force-feed them , because when birds are in shock like this they just will not eat . 

  In the end we released two of these three lucky ones back to the same barn they were born in . 

  We will never know why their parents deserted them ( maybe pesticides got them ) , but I am sure their offspring will not lose any sleep over it . 

  These things happen in the animal world . 

  A human family would never return to such a scene of grisly death , but the owls just took it all calmly . 

  This re-releasing is unfortunately often necessary because man breaks the delicate balance owls have with their habitat . 

  As the habitat shrinks , parents abandon their young to lessen the competition for food . 

  More often than not when I am called out it's to find an owl has been poisoned , trapped or shot . 

  Obviously , when parents are killed a whole generation is wiped out at a stroke . 

  Need I say more ? 

  Poisoning and how to deal with it is one of the skills you have to learn when you're dealing with sick birds . 

  The tell-tale signs of poisoning in birds are lethargy , refusing to feed and discoloration of the eyes . 

  The remedy is quite messy , at least one of the remedies . 

  It entails beating up some chicken eggs , putting them into a syringe and squirting the uncooked scramble down the bird's throat . 

  This makes it vomit and gives it diarrhoea , so you're flushing the toxins out of both ends . 

  Sometimes you've got to be a little cruel to be kind ! 

  One of the most lovable , if not the most lovable ( apart from Dawn ) , owlets I have ever had the pleasure to meet was Biggles . 

  Biggles -- we named him that because of his flying , or should I say crashing , antics -- had the misfortune to be one of Barny's babies . 

  He was knocked around so much by his father that he ended up with a crooked leg , but he must have had some courage , because he was the only one of his clutch to survive . 

  He was , however , failing to thrive , so Maureen and I decided to take him away from Barny and put him into care , so to speak . 

  Maureen nursed him back to reasonable health in her bedroom . 

  Every day after school I would rush round to her house to see how he was getting on and take a turn at feeding him . 

  Once he was on the mend , we decided to try and do something about his crooked leg . 

  Maureen came up with the ingenious idea of making a sling . 

  It looked just like a sailor's hammock made out of toilet paper , cotton wool and string . 

  The idea was to put him in it from time to time to give his gammy leg a rest . 

  Unfortunately , it did not seem to do much good , but it was to come in very useful later . 

  Another problem was his feathers : he was not growing down quickly enough and he was always shivering , so Maureen made him a little coat out of cotton wool . 

  He did look strange , wearing his woolly jacket and swinging in his sling ! 

  The coat helped . 

  A month later his down had grown through and he was not shaking so much . 

  If I tell you that Maureen actually had to give him the kiss of life twice when he caught a chill , you shall appreciate why we went to such lengths to keep him warm . 

  Anyway , by the time Maureen went on her annual holiday , Biggles was feeding himself a bit and coming on well , so I took over . 

  I even learnt how to change his soiled coat . 

  I kept him in Maureen's bedroom , despite Mum's protests . 

  All the time Maureen was away she was worrying herself sick about Biggles . 

  She even sent him a postcard . 

  She was really pleased when she came back and found him fighting fit , even though he was still using one wing as a crutch to support his crooked leg . 

  We decided it was time to do something about that , so we took him along to the vet . 

  The vet said there was not much he could do because he did not think Biggles was old enough or strong enough to survive the anaesthetic . 

  We said he was stronger than he looked , but the vet turned us away and told us to bring him back when he was bigger . 

  We tried to pull the leg up so that he would not put so much weight on it , but then he only found it even harder to walk straight . 

  His stumbling gait took him off in all directions except the one he wanted to go in . 

  If he wanted to reach an object he had to set out in the wrong direction and hope to angle in on it ! 

  He actually found it easier to walk backwards . 

  He even flew backwards sometimes , though how he managed this I shall never know . 

  Three weeks went by and we were back at the vet's surgery . 

  This time the vet cut a V out of Biggles's crippled leg bone and thought that might do the trick . 

  We put him back in the sling-hammock to give him a chance to heal . 

  After five days we removed the packing around the splint . 

  It was looking good . 

  Two days later we took off the splint . 

  Now the wing only dropped slightly . 

  It was a definite improvement . 

  Biggles seemed to think so , too . 

  By now he had become imprinted on Maureen . 

  That means he thought Maureen was his mother , so I gave him to her . 

  He's still just as comical and lives with Maureen to this day . 

  I do not know why , but he seems to detest me -- every time I go round to see him he hisses at me . 

  Well , he is Barny's son , after all ! 

  Not all stories have happy endings , however . 

  Before raising Biggles we had a few failures with baby owls the shocking Barnys had abused . 

  But caring for Biggles taught us a lot . 

  I tried rearing owlets in my bedroom under heat lamps several times , usually without much success . 

  Come to think of it , I always seem to have baby owls in my bedroom . 

  Perhaps that's why it smells so terrible in there . 

  One particular owl that sticks in my mind was one I kept alive for six weeks , in the early days . 

  He seemed to be doing fine and then one night I found him cold and dying . 

  I cuddled him for four hours until he died in my hands . 

  I was very upset , even though I had seen a lot of birds die before ; I had really thought this one was going to make it . 

  I am afraid this is just something you have to get used to , like a nurse in a hospital -- it goes with the job . 

  Still , more make it these days , I am glad to say . 

  I hope to rear another barn owl like Dawn some day , from the egg to the jesses . 

  That would really be something . 

  The Prince's Trust Award 

  Breeding owls and travelling around the West Country giving lectures on them in schools and the like can be an expensive pastime . 

  I've never charged a fee for anything I've done and so all my work has had to be financed out of my own pocket . 

  I am not grumbling , after all it is my hobby . 

  But for a schoolboy , you will appreciate this was not easy , and became more and more difficult as the amount of lecture work and breeding costs increased . 

  Although in the early days Derek was happy to drive me around and did not even charge me for the petrol , pretty soon our visits here and there grew so frequent and far afield that he was finding himself quite a bit out of pocket . 

  Generally , anyone who invited me to lecture did pay travelling expenses without my having to ask , but there were a lot of other people and places -- like farmers and release sites -- we had to visit , not to mention collecting food and injured birds . 

  Fuel costs were really starting to mount up , so I felt I had to contribute something . 

  By the autumn of 1989 I could see that the work I was planning more breeding and lecturing , was going to get very costly . 

  My long-suffering owl chauffeur said to me one day while he was yet again driving me to some venue I was going to give a talk at , " You and that bird are costing me a bloody fortune ! " 

  I knew Derek really enjoyed our trips and was only kidding , but I was thinking of ways in which I could raise more money to pay my share . 

  I was already working as Derek's apprentice carpet-fitter in my spare time -- when I had any -- but the wage I was getting was going not only on the birds' upkeep but also on mine . 

  I had to give Mum something . 

  It was getting to the point where it was either me or the birds ! 

  About this time a new librarian , Suzy Chaplin , arrived at our school and she took a keen interest in anything the students were doing . 

  I was chatting to her one lunch-time and just happened to mention that I kept and bred barn owls . 

  She showed immediate enthusiasm and , well , one thing led to another and before long I had invited her and her family to come over to Tintagel to meet Dawn and see her fly . 

  This was to prove a very fortunate meeting . 

  The following week Suzy , her husband and daughter , turned up and were really thrilled to see the birds , especially Dawn , who captured all their hearts . 

  Later on that week we were talking in the library again and somehow the topic of owls came up in conversation once more . 

  I must have mentioned how expensive my activities were becoming , because Suzy suggested that I tried applying for a grant . 

  This was news to me . 

  I did not think you could get grants for your hobby ; I thought they were for businesses and things like that . 

  But Suzy said there were all kinds of awards young people could get , particularly if what they were doing was connected with conservation -- I was really surprised . 

  She also said she would find out more information about a few of them for me . 

  Within two days she had found some information on the Prince's Trust , which is a scheme set up by the Duke of Cornwall , HRH Prince Charles himself . 

  I laughed . 

  The thought of asking one of the Royal family for money to breed owls seemed a bit out of order ; however , Suzy explained that the scheme was designed to help young people just like myself set up projects or businesses which are of benefit to the local community , as well as themselves . 

  I was still doubtful , but Suzy said she thought the work I was doing fitted this description perfectly and encouraged me to apply . 

  I felt a little embarrassed about putting myself forward , but she nagged me until I wrote a letter and posted it off . 

  Even when my application was on its way I still could not convince myself that what I was doing was likely to qualify for any kind of grant . 

  I put it out of my mind . 

  A week or so went by and I had not received a reply . 

  Then suddenly I had a phone call , which really was out of the blue because if anything I had been expecting a letter . 

  A man who represented the regional office of the Prince's Trust in Truro was ringing to ask for more information about my work . 

  He asked me about costs and what exactly I'd been doing . 

  I told him everything he wanted to know . 

  He thanked me and said that my application would be on the table for consideration at the next meeting of the committee . 

  Just over a week into December I received an early Christmas present : a letter from the Prince's Trust containing a cheque for 200 ! 

  I had been awarded something I never dreamed I'd be eligible for . 

  The letter said that the work I was doing with barn owls was very worthwhile and deserving , and the Trust wished to publicise it further with my permission . 

  Of course I agreed . 

  I had not known that I was going to be presented with such a large sum . 

  It was great . 

  Two days later they phoned up to confirm that the cheque had arrived and congratulated me . 

  Then they discussed what they had in mind for the publicity . 

  My mouth fell open . 

  Basically , they wanted to write a press release about me and distribute it to all the local newspapers , Radio Cornwall , Television South West and the BBC regional news programme , Spotlight . 

  I was staggered . 

  The BBC actually interviewed me for Spotlight , both at home , flying Dawn , and at Sir James Smith's school , giving a lecture . 

  I shall tell you more about it in the next chapter . 

  I've still got the video of it . 

  It gave me quite a thrill . 

  This recognition by the Prince's Trust gave me more than just financial help . 

  It was to have a big effect on my whole life . 

  Things started to look up for me . 

  It seemed that everyone wanted to know about what I was doing . 

  If someone had told me a month before that my life was going to be changed so dramatically , I would not have believed them . 

  And it got me thinking that there must be thousands of people up and down the country doing worthwhile things to protect our environment and wildlife who go unrecognised . 

  I felt very lucky . 

  But then when people are driving at night and catch a glimpse of a barn owl in their headlights , they should feel lucky , too . 

  Introduction 

  But Eeyore was saying to himself , " This writing business . 

  Pencils and what-not . 

  Over-rated , if you ask me . 

  Silly stuff . 

  Nothing in it . " 

  " Winnie-the-Pooh " , by AA Milne . 

  This thesis details research undertaken by the author in the Department of Computing at Nottingham Polytechnic over almost five years . 

  The work has been funded by the European Commission under the ESPRIT initiative . 

  The subject of the research is the automatic recognition of handwriting by computer . 

  In particular , it details a system which takes output from a pattern recogniser in the form of alternative characters , and applies orthographic and lexical information in order to discriminate between these alternative characters . 

  Handwriting , or script recognition is a difficult task due to the inherent ambiguity within the input . 

  For example , do the following words say dog or clog , clown or down ? 

  The word can really looks more like cau . 

  However , when these words occur within a meaningful context , they can easily be read and understood by humans . 

  For example : 

  Handwriting contains many similarly shaped characters which must be distinguished from each other to achieve effective recognition . 

  Some easily confusable characters pairs are U-V , C-L , a-d , n-h , o-a , and c-e . 

  Upper and lower case letters are often written the same , such as C-c , K-k , and O-o , the distinguishing factor here is the character size relative to the line spacing . 

  For P-p and Y-y it is the position of the characters relative to the baseline . 

  Letters can also be confused with digits such as O-0 , I-1 , l-1 , Z-2 , S-5 , g-9 and G-6 . 

  Cases such as I-l-1 and O-0 are often written identically and therefore only distinguishable in context . 

  The problem is much worse when characters run together . 

  For example , the samples of handwriting given above are written cursively ( or " joined-up " ) . 

  If characters are printed separately , it is relatively simple to find where one character finishes and the next one begins . 

  For cursive writing , the data must first be segmented into characters before recognition can take place . 

  One of the most difficult tasks is to decide on appropriate segmentation points . 

  The most commonly applied method for recognition is by matching input script with a database of previously collected " template " characters . 

  Good recognition performance is ultimately linked not only to the capacity of the system to extract and compare good feature sets , but also to the integration of context and knowledge in the different processing stages . 

  Hence the current study forms the first part of a contextual recognition system . 

  It describes a number of levels of analysis in a handwriting recognition system . 

  These begin with the application of orthographic information . 

  Letters do not combine arbitrarily to form words , so letter string combinations produced by a pattern recogniser can be checked for acceptability . 

  Non-occurring sequences can be discarded . 

  The aim is to reduce the pattern level ambiguity until only allowable words remain . 

  This can be achieved by comparing the candidate letter strings with a list of n-grams . 

  N-grams are legal letter string combinations collected from a dictionary or a corpus of text . 

  In this way strings containing non-occurring sequences of letters will be rejected . 

  Unfortunately the remaining strings are not always words . 

  Candidate letter strings can be compared with a list of words instead of n-grams , and this method guarantees lexical output . 

  Such a process is known as a lexical check . 

  The required list of words , or lexicon , can be acquired from a standard dictionary in machine readable form . 

  This thesis is concerned with aspects such as the storage of a lexicon for ease of searching . 

  A number of alternative data structures are discussed and compared . 

  Ambiguity remains because most word positions give rise to a number of alternative candidate words . 

  However words do not combine arbitrarily to form phrases and sentences , so higher level constraints can be applied to reduce the remaining ambiguity . 

  For example this can be syntactic and semantic information to ensure more meaningful results , especially for running text . 

  Other sources of information are discussed in the current study , along with details of their integration . 

  The additional information gained from higher level knowledge must be combined in some meaningful way in order to contribute best to the recognition system . 

  It should be noted that although the system described often refers to the particular data for on-line cursive script recognition , the techniques used are equally applicable to other forms of recognition . 

  This can be on-line or off-line recognition of hand-printed characters , or of machine-printed characters using optical character recognition . 

  All of these situations produce character-level ambiguity which must be reduced to achieve good recognition performance . 

  In the future it is hoped that there will be a new type of computer interface which should mimic the conventional pen and paper interface . 

  Such " notepad " machines are currently being introduced into the market , and it is expected that they will become an effective alternative to keyboards in applications where handwriting will prevail . 

  Effective and reliable handwriting recognition will necessarily form an important part of this new technology . 

  Chapter One 

  Review 

  Introduction 

  Computerised document handling is now common in every activity within business life . 

  The continuously falling price and increasing power of desk-top computers has led to their widespread availability and use . 

  To take full advantage of the facilities offered by these systems , keyboard skills must be acquired by users who wish to interact efficiently with the machines . 

  Objections are frequently raised by affected personnel , and methods to input documents automatically are thus highly desirable . 

  Moreover , the introduction of notepad style computers will necessitate non-keyboard input . 

  Two natural modes of communicating with computers are via spoken and handwritten input . 

  For such input to be possible , the speech or handwritten data must be " recognised " by the computer and translated into digital text representation ( such as ASCII characters ) . 

  The human information processing system generally has few problems with spoken or written language , even when the stimulus is noisy or ambiguous . 

  We learn to filter out background noise when listening to a particular voice , accents provide little difficulty , and even heavy dialects can be understood with some practice . 

  Reading takes years of learning and practice by the human child , who already has an established linguistic and cognitive system . 

  However , the skilled human reader has few problems reading text in many different fonts , including new ones , or with handwritten material , including un-familiar handwriting . 

  Badly formed characters and even illegible words can be understood in context because human readers use their knowledge of language and the world to guide their processing . 

  Similar problems in isolated characters or words are not so easy to read , because there is little or no surrounding context ( Mitchell , 1982 ) . 

  For automatic recognition of both script and speech the information physically present in the signal is not sufficient for unambiguous identification of words . 

  Higher level knowledge can improve recognition performance by helping to choose between alternative characters . 

  For written language this involves information about how letters combine to form words , or orthography . 

  For spoken language phonological information is required to understand how individual speech sounds ( phonemes ) combine and affect each other within words and across word boundaries . 

  Additional knowledge about how words may combine to form sentences , and about how sentences are put together to produce text will also be necessary to resolve remaining ambiguity at the lexical level . 

  This involves information about syntax , semantics , discourse structure , pragmatics and knowledge of the world . 

  Present systems for the input of text into a computer mainly use keyboards . 

  Trained keyboard users can type much faster than humans write by hand , but speech is much faster than either of these for the majority of people . 

  Trained writers of shorthand can however transcribe speech faster than keyboard entry ( Leedham , 1990 ) . 

  In the future it is envisaged that all three methods will be available as alternative input techniques for computers , perhaps including shorthand as a fourth . 

  Already existing documents can be input using optical character recognition ( OCR ) . 

  This may be printed text or handwritten . 

  There are situations in which one technique will be preferable to all others , and which of these is most suitable depends on the particular situation . 

  For example , people who are not trained in keyboard use would find either speech or script recognition systems much faster and easier to use . 

  However in noisy or quiet environments , both keyboard and speech input may be unsuitable . 

  For example for note-taking in lectures and seminars , amongst noisy machinery and other background conversations speech input would be difficult , and in quiet environments ( for example in libraries ) both speech and keyboard input are inappropriate . 

  For security reasons it may be better to write ( or use a keyboard ) to avoid being overheard , and for medical doctors who have automated systems , speech is considered unsuitable in front of the patient and others in a hospital ward , and keyboard input is socially unacceptable . 

  Patients are used to doctors writing while they are talking , but typing would be disconcerting . 

  A script recognition system would also be more easily adapted to foreign languages ( if the same alphabet is used ) , than would a speech recognition system which would require completely different information about the phonology of other languages . 

  Interestingly , there have been rapid developments in the recognition of oriental languages ( e. g. Japanese , Chinese and Korean ) . 

  The large character set used by such languages ( a few thousand ) makes keyboard use unwieldy , and the uniformity of writing style makes recognition relatively simple ( Tappert et al , 1990 ) . 

  Handwritten data is input to a computer via an electronic tablet which accurately captures x , y coordinate information of pen-tip movement . 

  Such tablets first became available in the late 1950's and precipitated considerable activity in on-line handwriting recognition . 

  The recent advances in technology have combined tablets and flat displays to bring input and output together on the same surface , known as electronic paper . 

  This can simply be described as a flat panel display that is written on with a stylus ( pen ) . 

  As the stylus moves in contact with the display , pixels are illuminated to leave a trail of " electronic ink " on the writing surface . 

  Tablets are now much more accurate than before , and computers are more compact and powerful . 

  Combined with better recognition algorithms we now see the advent of the pen-based or " notepad " computer . 

  This follows naturally from small " laptop " personal computers which are still keyboard-based . 

  See Higgins and Ford ( 1991b ) for an excellent review of pen-driven interfaces . 

  For the reasons explained above , the interest in script recognition systems has been expanding in recent years . 

  The automatic recognition of handwritten words and digits is an important but difficult task that now has a large literature ( see Harmon , 1972 ; Tappert et al , 1990 ) . 

  In some systems the input script is restricted to upper case unconnected letters , or lower case unconnected characters . 

  Systems coping with cursive script are fewer and on the whole less accurate than their unconnected character counterparts because recognition of cursive script is much more difficult . 

  Individual letters are subject to more variation in cursive writing , depending upon the letters preceding and following it ( Eldridge et al , 1984 ; Wing , 1979 ) , and because it is not clear where one letter finishes and the next begins , a stage of segmentation is usually employed , which introduces more ambiguity . 

  Tappert ( et al , 1990 ) cites eleven experimental handprinting recognition systems , and twenty-one commercial handprinting recognition systems ( sixteen use opaque tablets , and five use integrated tablet/ LCD devices ) . 

  Tappert also lists four experimental cursive script recognition systems , although literature suggests that there are others which he does not mention , or that have appeared since his paper was published . 

  Most existing recognition systems concentrate on the pattern recognition process , and have not utilised the substantial amounts of available context . 

  Typically context is used only in the form of spelling correction information to compensate for errors in character recognition . 

  The goal of pattern recognition is to map the set of initial representations ( data ) into a set of interpretations ( names ) . 

  For handwriting this means matching sequences of x , y coordinates with the characters they represent . 

  Pattern recognisers are often quoted as producing correct results for a certain percentage of the time . 

  Given the ambiguous nature of the input , recognition results are never going to reach 100 % even for trained , writer-dependent systems . 

  Most writers have a range of shapes for a given letter depending upon the particular letter context in which it occurs . 

  All writers make occasional slips when letters are mis-formed , omitted entirely and so on ( Wing 1979 ; Ellis , 1979 ) . 

  The only way for correct recognition to be achieved in such situations is by the use of additional contextual information . 

  Systems that have employed more contextual information are text recognition systems ( OCR ) which have also made use of error correction techniques . 

  Examples of these applications ( speech , script and text recognition systems ) will be discussed in the following sections . 

  Sources of linguistic information required by a recognition system will also be investigated . 

  Speech recognition 

  Research into speech recognition has traditionally taken priority over research into script recognition . 

  At a first glance , it may be thought that methods for script and speech recognition would be the same , because both are attempting to process natural language . 

  However where written language is letter-based , spoken language is phoneme-based ( Crystal , 1987 ) . 

  A phoneme is the smallest unit of speech sound , and the correspondence between phonemes and letters is not on a direct one-to-one basis . 

  Pattern recognition for speech recognition presents different problems from that for script recognition , one of the main problems for speech is identifying word boundaries from a continuous sound signal ( Fallside and Woods , 1985 ) . 

  The majority of past and current speech recognition systems have used whole word based methods to identify what has been spoken and have been very restricted . 

  Because of this , successful systems tend to be speaker dependent , allowing only isolated words , and have small vocabularies ( Holmes , 1988 ) . 

  The aim would ultimately be for a speaker independent system , allowing continuous speech , with a large vocabulary , and this has only recently become a practical possibility as speech recognition methods have shifted to phoneme-based systems , using transitional probabilities and methods such as hidden Markov models to allow sequences of phonemes found in English ( or whatever language is being considered ) and reject others . 

  The problem is still that the location of beginnings and ends of words are never certain . 

  Consequently most of the speech recognition research has concentrated on the pattern recognition level , and references to the use of higher level information of the language are mainly theoretical . 

  In fact a large vocabulary system accepting natural language is simpler to obtain for written language than for spoken , because the recognition units ( i. e. letters ) appear to be easier to identify , and identifying word breaks is not such a problem . 

  Letter databases needed for matching are smaller , but give a much larger number of potential candidates . 

  Technological advances over recent years have made script input systems more viable , and the improvements in script recognition are greater than the equivalent for speech . 

  Script recognition 

  Handwriting recognition is performed either on-line or off-line . 

  The former means that the machine recognises the writing while the user writes , and is also known as dynamic or real-time recognition , although the recognition will lag behind the writer to a certain extent . 

  This may be one or two characters in most commercial systems ( Tappert et al , 1990 ) , but need only be fast enough to keep up with the writing . 

  On-line handwriting recognition requires some kind of digitising data tablet to capture the script as it is written . 

  These typically have resolutions of 200 points per inch , a sampling rate of 100 points per second , and an indication of pen-down . 

  For recognition systems which use electronic paper ( tablet and display combined ) there remains a user-interface problem of exactly when the display of script should be removed for the recognised text to appear . 

  This process should be unobtrusive to the user , but it is not clear how best this should be done . 

  If each word is displayed as soon as it is recognised , the display will be changing disconcertingly whilst the user is writing the next word . 

  The user may wish to see the previous few words , or the current sentence , or perhaps more than one sentence , as handwriting before the display changes . 

  In contrast , off-line handwriting recognition is performed after the writing is completed , and involves aspects of computer vision via an optical scanner to convert the image of the writing into a bit pattern . 

  This is similar to optical character recognition ( OCR ) which has concentrated mostly on machine-printed characters , although there has been some effort on handwriting as well . 

  The use of higher-level techniques in OCR are similar to those in dynamic script recognition , but ambiguity is generally less at the letter level , although merged or overlapping characters present more of a problem . 

  The advantage of on-line data capture is that temporal or dynamic information about the handwriting can also be collected . 

  This may be information such as the number of strokes used , the order in which the strokes are written , the direction of the writing , and even the speed of the writing for each stroke . 

  The use of this kind of information by handwriting recognisers can improve their accuracy . 

  Little learning ( on the part of the user ) is needed to use an on-line recognition system because it seems just like real pen and paper . 

  However the main disadvantage seems to be that current digitising tablets are not quite so comfortable and natural to use . 

  Data collected by this method are usually in the form of x , y co-ordinates , and are passed into a pattern recogniser , which will aim to produce characters , or a number of candidate characters as output , usually by matching against a database . 

  Input is coded and a decision is made about the possible characters it represents ( Frishkopf and Harmon , 1961 ; Munson , 1968 ; Tappert , 1982 ; Wright , 1989 ) . 

  Pattern recognition techniques that have most often been applied to script include spatial analysis methods ( where strokes are coded by a numbering system on a grid ) which are easy to implement but are only suitable for unconnected characters , and will be user dependent in order to keep the database of character codings small and accuracy high . 

  Topological feature based methods detect and code straight lines and the orientation of strokes . 

  They also identify curves , pen-ups , dots and cross strokes , and can be applied at the single character level and for complete word analysis . 

  Vector chain coding techniques ( e. g. Freeman , 1961 ) , which code six or eight directions of strokes ( see chapter 2 for more details ) are also often used for pattern recognition . 

  Even if the pattern recognition stage is highly reliable , there will be some instances of error and ambiguity , especially if the script is untidy , illegible , or if the slope of writing is extreme . 

  In a word like pack for example , it is unlikely that a pattern recogniser , no matter how accurate , will be able to say if the correct sequence of letters is pack , paclc , or padc . 

  Consider also the word minimum and the candidate letters a recogniser might produce for it . 

  Each curve in the script could form part of many different letters ( e. g. n , u , m , w , v and i ) , and the number of alternative strings these letters would combine to form will be very large . 

  Therefore some form of subsequent processing ( often called post-processing ) is necessary to improve recognition rates . 

  The most common type of contextual information to be implemented in script recognition is that of the surrounding letters ( Ehrich and Koehler , 1975 ; Goshtasby and Ehrich , 1988 ) , or orthography . 

  Orthographic information can be taken advantage of to improve recognition . 

  Letters do not combine arbitrarily to form words . 

  For example , the number of four letter combinations of the alphabet is 264 = 456,976 . 

  The number of four letter words , taken from a dictionary of about 14,000 words , is 1,323 . 

  This is about 0.3 % of the total number of possible combinations . 

  For a pattern recognition system which outputs alternative candidates for each letter position in a word , this fact can be exploited to rule out letter combinations which are not allowable in English . 

  There are various ways in which this can be done . 

  For example , a common method in the script recognition literature has been to use n-grams ( Riseman and Hanson , 1974 ; Ehrich and Koehler , 1975 ; Higgins and Whitrow , 1984 ; Whitrow and Higgins , 1987 ) , or letter transitional probabilities such as the Viterbi algorithm ( Hull , Srihari and Choudhari , 1983 ) , or Markov modelling ( Raviv , 1967 ; Neuhoff , 1975 ; Farag , 1979 ) to rule out illegal strings of letters , or to select the most likely letter combinations . 

  However , this does not exploit redundancy to the full . 

  In the case of n-grams , there are 13,166 legal quad-grams of the total possible combinations ( from the above 14,000 word dictionary ) , a reduction to 3 % compared to 0.3 % for words . 

  If only the most likely combinations are used , from estimated probabilities , there will also be a significant probability of error . 

  This is because if the most likely candidate is not the correct one , this method will give an uncorrectable error which will be propagated if transitional probabilities are combined . 

  Even if positional n-grams are used ( Shinghal , Rosenberg and Toussaint , 1978 ) , they will not be as successful as the words themselves ( Wells et al , 1990a ; Ford and Higgins , 1990 ) . 

  Systems for handwriting recognition 

  Script recognition systems are traditionally most heavily concerned with the problem of pattern recognition . 

  For a comprehensive review of pattern recognition methods , see Tappert , Suen and Wakahara ( Tappert et al , 1990 ) . 

  A range of methods have been applied to the recognition of printed characters , or unconnected handwriting , especially for oriental alphabets as well as for English . 

  There are a number of commercial systems currently available on the market which recognise handprint , some of which are quite successful for careful writing within specified boxes ( quoted recognition rates of up to 95 % ) , and very successful if the system has been trained in a writer-dependent mode . 

  Further details of printed character recognition systems are not included here in order to concentrate on cursive handwriting systems . 

  The recognition of cursive script is much more difficult because several characters can be written with a single stroke . 

  Consequently there have been fewer serious efforts towards obtaining effective solutions . 

  Moreover such efforts have been restricted to lower case English , and have concentrated on two main approaches . 

  Firstly there is the whole word approach , whereby shape and pattern recognition procedures attempt to match directly with complete words . 

  The second and more common approach involves breaking or segmenting each cursive word into sub-parts . 

  It should be noted that it is often difficult to compare different recognition systems as they are reported because differences in input data and equipment can affect performance . 

  Details of the exact nature of the writing tested , such as the size of the script , the quality of script , the speed it was written , the pen type , tablet resolution and so on are often sadly lacking in research papers . 

  The hardware used for data collection can also give rise to differences in recognition performance . 

  Standards for describing such information should be defined so that systems can be more meaningfully assessed and compared . 

  Recognition of whole words 

  Studies of whole word recognition attempt to recognise a word as a single entity by examining certain global features of the word . 

  Such approaches have been applied to cursive words of English ( Frishkopf and Harmon 1961 ; Harmon , 1962b ; Earnest , 1962 ; Farag , 1979 ; Brown and Ganapathy , 1980 ) , but to achieve any degree of accuracy the vocabulary which can be recognised is very small . 

  Pattern recognition procedures used for this approach are mostly identical or similar to those applied to separate characters . 

  For example the system developed by Earnest ( 1962 ) extracts a few primitive measures such as differential vertical extent , closed loops and a count of horizontal centreline crossings . 

  These features are matched against a stored dictionary ( approximately 10,000 words ) of similar word encodings . 

  Five different subjects were asked to write 100 test words selected at random from the dictionary . 

  A CRT light-pen was used for input of script , and possible answers were lists of about 20 words . 

  The correct word was included about 60 % of the time , although it was found in the first position of the list of alternatives only 18 % of the time . 

  Another study ( Farag , 1979 ) used elastic matching with eight direction codes to establish accurate recognition , unfortunately for only ten cursively written key words . 

  More recently , O'Hair and Kabrisky ( 1991 ) have presented a method for recognising whole words as single symbols , although their system is applied to the off-line recognition of printed text . 

  The technique uses Fourier transforms , and reportedly correctly recognises at least 5000 words using 24 various font styles , including cursive ones . 

  Current thinking is that the whole word recognition approach is not viable for the more general problem with large vocabularies ( Tappert et al , 1990 ) . 

  However it may be very effective in situations where the number of words likely to be written is severely restricted . 

  Segmentation methods 

  More commonly applied recognition techniques split cursive words into a number of smaller parts . 

  This process is known as segmentation , and methods vary considerably resulting in individual strokes , characters , or some unit which is usually less than a character . 

  Sequences of strokes or stroke segments are used to identify characters . 

  Recognition of these resulting segments utilise techniques similar to those used in systems for unconnected characters . 

  One early study of connected handwriting ( Mermelstein and Eden , 1964 ) segmented the input script into upstrokes and downstrokes by segmenting at points of minimum velocity . 

  Practically unique letter specification was obtained from only the downstrokes of the writing , and there is other evidence to suggest that most of the information in cursive writing is in the downward portions of the writing . 

  The upward portions of writing serve mainly as ligatures to join characters together . 

  Other studies have analysed cursive words on a letter-by-letter basis ( Frishkopf and Harmon , 1961 ; Harmon 1962a ) where segmentation was based on an estimate of letter width , and letters identified by reference to stored features such as cusps , closures , retrograde strokes and so on . 

  Elastic curve matching has also been applied to cursive script recognition . 

  Letter segmentation and recognition were effectively combined into a single operation by Tappert ( Tappert , 1982 ) who matched segments against stored letter prototypes and evaluated recognition at all possible segmentations . 

  Later Tappert went on to use a loose segmentation method to cut script into sub-strokes in regions identified as possible ligatures ( Tappert , 1988 ) . 

  This was carried out on-line , although a similar method has been employed in an off-line study ( Bozinovic and Srihari , 1989 ) . 

  Much research effort is still being expended into different segmentation methods and a number of new techniques have recently been reported ( Wright , 1989 ; Kadirkamanathan and Rayner , 1990 ; Teulings et al , 1990 ; Higgins and Ford , 1991a ) . 

  Wright's system for cursive script recognition has efficient low-level processing but relies on a dictionary and higher level linguistic processing . 

  The system is quoted as correctly recognising 94 % of characters of a data set of 112 people's writing . 

  Another approach is investigating a stochastic method for segmentation inspired by simulated annealing ( Teulings and Schomaker , 1991 ) . 

  The use of neural networks for handwriting recognition is also currently being researched ( Schomaker and Teulings , 1990 ; Morasso and Pagliano , 1991 ; Skrzypek et al , 1991 ) . 

  Discussion 

  The highest level of information used in processing to date has been some form of lexical look-up . 

  The most common use of context has been some measure of how letters may legally combine to form words . 

  There is one major difference between the various methods for exemplifying this information . 

  This is whether or not the information is represented statistically . 

  Information about how letters combine is extracted from some source text or lexicon . 

  This information may then be represented statistically ; in terms of the frequency of occurrence of combinations of letters , or in terms of the probability that some letter is preceded by some combination of a number of other letters ( transitional probabilities ) ; or non-statistically in terms of whether or not some combination of letters occurs in the source . 

  This difference leads to different methods of operation and potential for success . 

  Examples of different systems will illustrate these points . 

  It is difficult to compare the success of different systems , for reasons including the following : 

  differences in performance may be due to changes in technology ; 

  coding methods may be constrained by methods of input and by the amount of main memory available to a system ; 

  the vocabulary of recognisable input differs widely ; 

  constraints imposed on input may differ ; 

  the number of writers for whom the system will operate effectively varies ; 

  the amount of training a system has received , both absolutely and in terms of the number of writers will influence its success ; 

  systems are rarely tested in a comparable way , for example in terms of actual input , number of writers , size of vocabulary and so on ; 

  apart from estimates of computational efficiency , success can only be assessed by considering how they cope with language in a principled way ; 

  none of the systems to be reported has been tested in a way which would allow evaluation of their linguistic effectiveness . 

  The use of context to aid handwriting recognition 

  Early systems were highly constrained by technology . 

  Advances in this area have led to the development of more realistic script recognition systems . 

  An early system that produced some success was that of Sayre ( 1973 ) . 

  The input to Sayre's system was provided by an earlier project ( Frishkopf and Harmon , 1961 ) . 

  It was received in the form of x , y co-ordinates of discrete points . 

  This data comprised alphabets and handwritten phrases of unsegmented form from various writers . 

  The input was cursive , lower case script . 

  The system stored the form any letter may take within the sample , and indicated all the different letters of which a segment of any description may be a part . 

  The input strings were segmented in the following way . 

  The input cursive line data was first filled in to a consistent thickness . 

  This was because coding of the data was in terms of its concentration , so that consistency was necessary to avoid spurious calculations . 

  Baselines were then established against which letter elements could be categorised . 

  These baselines divided the data into lower , middle and upper horizontal regions . 

  Vector changes relative to these regions were established and categorised according to type and position . 

  In this way , possible segmentation points were established and types of segment identified . 

  These segments were then checked against the reference database for possible identification checking both letter and letter string patterns . 

  Alternative identifications were produced which were then reduced by post-processing techniques . 

  Sayre intentionally did not include time and movement information in his encoding scheme . 

  He argued that since human readers do not use such information it is not necessary for successful recognition . 

  He did not place any constraints on input . 

  Sayre used two types of context to aid recognition . 

  One involved using whole word shape to help determine segment positions and to allow for letter shape variations within words . 

  This does not require any higher level knowledge . 

  The second form of context does . 

  Sayre used di-gram and tri-gram statistics to rule out implausible letter string combinations . 

  It was intended initially to use statistics reflecting the frequency of occurrence of letter combinations , together with letter probabilities from the pattern recogniser . 

  Sayre decided against this method . 

  This was because , he discovered , that when there is a borderline choice between two letters based on the output from the recogniser , the frequency statistics will favour one of the alternatives and permanently remove the others from consideration , even if they are correct . 

  For example , if the pattern recogniser produces " a " and " o " with equal probability , the choice between them will be based on frequency statistics . 

  The input word far would never be correctly recognised , since the sequence " fo " is approximately three times more common in English than the di-gram " fa " . 

  In other cases , statistics would not be able to decide . 

  " po " and " pa " are of almost equal probability , so that statistics could never decide between pod and pad , for example . 

  Even when information from the pattern recogniser favours one answer , bias from the statistics may lead to an incorrect result . 

  To overcome this problem , Sayre did not use probability information . 

  Rather he ruled out only very infrequent letter combinations , based on di-gram and tri-gram statistics . 

  This method does not always yield a unique result . 

  However , it is much more likely to produce the correct answer , even if this answer is one of several alternatives . 

  Sayre states that in most cases , there are less than four resulting alternative letter strings , and usually one . 

  He suggests that when there are alternatives , these could be reduced in several ways : by listing permissible combinations of words in phrases ; by listing allowable input sentences ; by ruling out infrequent words ; and by using grammatical criteria . 

  These suggestions appeal to higher level knowledge or suggest a fudge which would severely limit the scope of the system . 

  If the system does not produce a result , letters may be changed . 

  If nothing works , the input is considered illegible . 

  Sayre's paper illustrates the main problems with the statistical approach . 

  Some other examples are given of this approach , and then some systems are considered which extend non-statistical methods . 

  Ehrich and Koehler ( 1975 ) also produced a script recognition system which did not use real time information in its coding scheme , although they did use some sequence information . 

  Their input was via a graphics tablet . 

  Spatial data points were collected . 

  Data was compressed to reduce noise . 

  This was done by only sampling at fixed distances between points . 

  Size and slant constraints were employed , and writers were asked to use only particular forms of letters . 

  Horizontal baselines were established . 

  Letter features were extracted with respect to these , and compared to reference sets of features . 

  The pattern recogniser generated sets of letters which could have occurred . 

  Some substitution sets were stored to anticipate common confusions . 

  From this information , alternative letter strings were generated by combining the alternative letters . 

  Some of these strings could be ruled out because the linking information between the letters contradicted them . 

  Others could be ruled out because they were illegal strings by reference to binary di-grams . 

  Binary di-grams give non-statistical information about letter co-occurrence . 

  The dictionary used by this system consisted of 300 seven letter words . 

  Only letter strings which appeared in this dictionary were considered to be correct . 

  While this system may produce more than one letter string as a result , this did not happen often . 

  When it did , various nearest match strategies could be used to select among them . 

  A popular method for comparing coded input against reference prototypes is that of elastic matching ( also known as dynamic programming ) . 

  This method has had some success in speech recognition and its application to script recognition is described by Tappert ( 1982 ; see also Wong and Fallside , 1985 ) . 

  From input data via a graphics tablet , a sequence of parameter vectors are produced to represent a word . 

  These parameter vectors contain estimated strings of letters . 

  Operating on a word at a time using letter prototypes and allowing any letter to follow any letter , elastic matching is used to find the prototype sequence which best fits the input word vector . 

  This technique is insensitive to minor perturbations of input letter shapes . 

  Explicit letter segmentation is not performed . 

  Rather , elastic matching permits evaluation of all possible segmentations and simultaneously obtains some optimised combination of segmentation and recognition . 

  Basically , a graph of all possible letter-segment combinations is set up and an optimum path through the graph is calculated . 

  This pathfinding is augmented by limiting segmentation shapes and by using di-gram statistics . 

  Segmentation was inhibited at points which were definitely not segmentation points , with the aim of avoiding segmentation errors and speeding computation since this limits the possibilities . 

  Di-gram frequency information in the form of di-gram weights ( penalties ) derived from di-gram transition probabilities were employed . 

  On making the transition from one prototype to another a di-gram weight corresponding to the appropriate letter pair was used in the optimisation metric , to influence the path chosen . 

  In this way , the highest transition probability would have more weight in the optimisation procedure . 

  The transition probabilities used were based on a text containing 10,000 letters , with zero probabilities converted to a small value to enable computation . 

  This number of letters is approximately 1,700 words and is a relatively small sample set . 

  Tappert gives no other information about the source text used . 

  This use of probability information is susceptible to the problems of using statistical information outlined earlier and described by Sayre . 

  No lexical checking was carried out . 

  Burr ( 1983 ) also used a dynamic programming technique to recognise handwritten script . 

  He similarly used whole word shape constraints to aid recognition . 

  Input was lower case handwritten print via a graphics tablet . 

  Reference shapes were stored for each user , who input the 26 letters of the alphabet for this purpose . 

  A vector of 26 numbers was computed for each unknown letter . 

  Each number represented the difference in shape between the unknown and each reference letter . 

  For an unknown word of n characters , an n 26 shape matrix would result . 

  This shape matrix was then compared to a stored dictionary of words to find the word most consistent with the shape information . 

  This was based on correlation between the shape matrix and the shapes of words . 

  The words were stored in various sub-dictionaries containing vocabulary words and suffixes . 

  The aim was to extend this approach to include prefixes . 

  Burr's method of dictionary search was a complicated one . 

  The results presented are not detailed enough to assess the success of the method . 

  An attempt was made to take advantage of the morphological structure of words to cut down on storage space and search time . 

  However , it is not clear from the information presented by Burr how well he has been able to cope with the irregular morphological structure of English . 

  The dictionary was partitioned by word length . 

  Words were stored sequentially as their equivalent ASCII code . 

  To minimise memory costs , words were stored as their roots with suffixes stored in various sub-dictionaries . 

  These sub-dictionaries are stored on disk and are read in as required . 

  An input word is initially tested for the presence of a suffix . 

  If good evidence for one is found , then the remainder of the word is tested for the root . 

  The rationale for this approach is that there are few suffixes relative to words . 

  The shape matrices are then tested against those of the appropriate sub-dictionaries to find the best match , either between the unknown word and a dictionary entry , or a composite for suffixed forms . 

  The system allows for whole word matches as well as composite matches , so that if the suffix analysis does not produce a result , the whole word match is chosen . 

  This method seems over-complicated for lexical checking of pattern recognition output . 

  This is because suffixation in English is not a regular , rule-based system . 

  Burr does not give sufficient detail to enable a reasonable evaluation of its effectiveness . 

  A cursive script recognition system which incorporates efficient lexical look-up and is described in sufficient detail is that of Srihari and Bozinovic ( 1987 ) . 

  This system would appear to be the most comprehensive to date , and is reasonably successful . 

  The only constraint on writer input was that some care was taken over legibility . 

  Input was off-line . 

  After an initial normalisation procedure which standardised the data , the data was segmented and coded to produce possible letters and letter strings . 

  These were checked against a lexicon as they were produced so that unacceptable letter strings could be ruled out as early as possible . 

  The possible letters and letter strings had associated probabilities , based on properties of the pattern recognition system . 

  These probabilities were not used to rule out alternatives , rather to rank them in terms of their likelihood . 

  This rating system starts with the likelihoods of the beginnings of letter strings . 

  These beginnings , or prefixes , are checked against a lexicon , which is constructed in such a way that prefixes which will not produce legal words can be identified and pruned from the list . 

  Following pruning , the prefix with the consequent highest likelihood is expanded , producing a new prefix . 

  This is then sent for lexical checking and the ratings re-computed . 

  This continues iteratively over the possible candidates so that letter strings approach the length of the input string , illegal possibilities are ruled out and likelihoods re-computed to produce ordered resultant candidate words . 

  This process usually produces the correct result . 

  Occasionally the correct word would not be the highest rated . 

  The method of lexical representation used was one which allowed efficient representation and search . 

  The lexicon was represented as a trie . 

  See figure 1.1 , and Srihari , Hull and Choudhari ( 1983 ) for further details of this trie . 

  The advantages of this representation of the lexicon are that : 

  ( i ) 

  its structure naturally fits the search algorithm and hypothesis expanding rules ; 

  ( ii ) 

  it has convenient knowledge representation by storing various information in its nodes ; 

  ( iii ) 

  it has storage space savings due to numerous identical initial word segments . 

  Figure 1.1 Trie structure used by Srihari et al ( 1983 ) for the lexicon a , an , and , ann , annoy , bad , bade , badge , day , did , fad , fan , far . 

  Lexical checking here has the advantage that knowledge about how letters may legally combine by position is represented succinctly , and that any output from it will be of real words . 

  Srihari and Bozinovic ( 1987 ) tried the system with two different sized lexicons . 

  One contained 710 words , the other 7,800 words . 

  Performance with the larger lexicon showed some deterioration . 

  It is not clear in what way performance was considered to have deteriorated . 

  This effect may have been reversed if a larger set of test words had been used . 

  Summary and conclusions 

  A representative selection of the literature on script recognition has illustrated the main approaches to the problem , and the main problems to be resolved . 

  Systems have used information about the orthography of words to select output from a pattern recogniser in various ways . 

  Statistical information about n-grams has been applied to the output to select a single most likely letter string result . 

  The problems with this approach are that when the correct output is not the most likely , an error is bound to occur . 

  Also , this approach does not guarantee a word as output , even though parts of the letter string will contain legal combinations of letters . 

  Another approach has used n-gram information in a non-statistical way . 

  In these cases , letter string combinations are only ruled out if they do not occur in the sample source . 

  This approach may lead to the output of more than one letter string , and again does not guarantee that these letter strings will be words . 

  A third approach was considered to exhibit the least disadvantages . 

  This involved some form of lexical checking . 

  Here at least the output is guaranteed to be an acceptable word , although more than one may result . 

  While methods of choosing amongst alternatives when they occur ( which is not often ) may be based upon statistical measures of likelihood ( such as word frequency ; see Kucera and Francis , 1967 ) the problem remains that the correct word may be rejected . 

  It is important to note that the source of information , either for the extraction of n-grams or for the creation of a lexicon , requires careful consideration . 

  The source should reflect the nature of the to-be processed material , in both its statistical make-up and content . 

  Otherwise candidates which are acceptable may be rejected because they do not occur in the source , and alternatives which are not acceptable may be accepted because they appear in the source and provide a good fit , even though they are not characteristic of the material being processed . 

  If a lexicon contains many words which occur rarely or never in the input material , this will introduce costs of storage and search , although if a lexicon is too small , words will be rejected . 

  The selection of source material will limit the information which can be processed , and may introduce unnecessary overheads if it does not fit material to be processed well ( Sampson , 1989 ) . 

  Most authors suggest that ambiguity remaining after initial lexical processing would be reduced by applying higher level context , such as syntax and semantics . 

  None to date have attempted to do this . 

  It was argued earlier that only the use of higher level knowledge will enable any additional success . 

  Language has too much inherent ambiguity to enable solely bottom-up processing . 

  While this is a notoriously difficult problem , it was argued that some progress can be made . 

  Text recognition 

  The problems for text recognition are different from those of script recognition . 

  Text recognition refers to the recognition of machine printed characters by scanning documents . 

  This type of recognition is by definition off-line , and is often called optical character recognition ( OCR ) . 

  It is considered briefly here because researchers have concentrated more on the use of context , although none have ventured beyond the lexical level . 

  Many of the methods involve error correction techniques to resolve recognition errors . 

  This is also a problem for script recognition , although it has rarely been considered . 

  Three approaches are generally considered for the application of contextual information in the field of text recognition . 

  These are Markov , dictionary and hybrid methods ( combinations of the other two methods ) . 

  The Markov methods represent the bottom-up approach , and they model English text as a Markov process which allows transition probabilities to be assigned to various letter combinations or n-grams . 

  A dictionary of legal words is usually used to calculate the probabilities , but they can be calculated dynamically from the text being processed . 

  Generally , as the order of the n-gram and the number of constraints is increased the accuracy of the results will be improved , but at the expense of computational resources . 

  All permutations of transitional probabilities arising out of the character recognition are calculated to give an associated probability for a given string . 

  The requirement is to maximise this probability , and thus obtain the most likely string . 

  A number of methods have been proposed to achieve this aim , including the Viterbi algorithm ( Viterbi , 1967 ; Neuhoff , 1975 ; Shinghal and Toussaint , 1979a ) , probabilistic relaxation ( Goshtasby and Ehrich , 1988 ) , and the Recursive Bayes algorithm ( Raviv , 1967 ; Shinghal , Rosenberg and Toussaint , 1978 ) . 

  However it has been claimed that Markov probabilities do not give significant reductions in word error rate , and can even lead to an increased error rate ( Riseman and Ehrich , 1971 ; Riseman and Hanson , 1974 ; Hanson , Riseman and Fisher , 1976 ) . 

  Dictionary look-up techniques represent the top-down approach , and involve verifying the input word by matching it with a dictionary word . 

  In the simplest form the word will only be verified if it exists in the dictionary . 

  More complex techniques have been developed for approximate string matching , allowing for possible spelling or recognition errors in the input word ( Hall and Dowling , 1980 ; Kashyap and Oommen , 1984 ) . 

  The advantage of using hybrid methods is that high-order Markov dependencies do not have to be introduced because accuracy is ensured by using the dictionary . 

  The computational complexity of the problem is therefore reduced without sacrificing performance . 

  Examples of the application of some hybrid methods are discussed in the following section . 

  Hybrid methods 

  Shinghal and Toussaint ( 1979b ) used a combined bottom-up and top-down approach to using context in text recognition . 

  This paper exemplifies the main bottom-up approach used in this field , and also uses higher-level context . 

  They point out that bottom-up statistical methods are efficient from a computational point of view , but exhibit poor error correcting capabilities . 

  Dictionary look-up methods give impressive error correction but require much greater storage and computation . 

  They develop a combination of these two approaches which combine the advantages while minimising the disadvantages . 

  The knowledge of the statistical structure of English is used in conjunction with a Modified Viterbi Algorithm to obtain an optimal letter string from a number of alternatives . 

  The Viterbi algorithm combines information about the probability of a letter being correct given knowledge of the performance of an input device , with transitional probabilities to select the most likely letter string . 

  The algorithm is modified , since only some set of the higher probability letters are selected as candidates to be chosen between , instead of choosing between all possible candidates . 

  Note that this method is open to the criticisms made of statistical methods above . 

  Even if the higher probability strings are included in the computation , as opposed to just the highest , there remains a built in possibility of error . 

  Shinghal and Toussaint estimated their transitional probabilities from a corpus of English text containing 531,445 words . 

  Uni-gram probabilities were used . 

  Shinghal , Rosenberg and Toussaint ( 1978 ) compared the use of uni-gram and di-gram probabilities both position dependent and independent . 

  They found that performance improved as the amount of context increased , so that word position dependent n-gram probabilities gave better performance . 

  Beyond a certain point however , the amount of improvement tailed off with increase in context . 

  Longer grams have greater storage requirements too , so there is a trade-off between performance and storage . 

  The dictionary look-up algorithm was based on that of Bledsoe and Browning ( 1966 ) . 

  Input words were coded by a feature vector sequence . 

  The words in the dictionary were also coded in this way . 

  Input feature vectors were compared to those of the dictionary words , and the word with the best match was chosen as the recognised word . 

  The dictionary contained 11,603 words . 

  The dictionary method gives much greater error correction performance , with greater storage requirements and computational cost . 

  The combined algorithm was called the Predictor-Corrector Algorithm ( PCA ) . 

  This combined the two approaches to reduce the computational costs of the dictionary algorithm while maintaining its advantages . 

  In this case , the dictionary was partitioned by word length and , for any length , was sorted by the vector sequences of the words in descending order . 

  In this case , only a fraction of the words from any sub-list need to be searched to find the best match . 

  The number of words to be searched is an heuristic decided upon by the user . 

  The PCA recognises a word using the modified Viterbi algorithm . 

  The result is then checked in the dictionary . 

  This means that fewer words need to be checked in the dictionary . 

  If the word exists in the dictionary it is taken to be the answer . 

  Otherwise , the vector scores of the words in the neighbourhood of the result are calculated and the word with the closest score is taken as the answer . 

  This method assumes that no two words in the dictionary have the same length and the same vector score . 

  So far this assumption has not been violated . 

  Hull , Srihari and Choudhari ( 1983 ) compared performance of two types of bottom-up and top-down ( or hybrid ) algorithms . 

  One was the PCA as just discussed . 

  The other was an algorithm which integrated bottom-up and top-down knowledge sources ( Srihari , Hull and Choudhari , 1983 ) . 

  This second method checked letter strings in a lexicon while selection was made amongst the possible alternative letter strings ( see Srihari and Bozinovic , 1987 , discussed earlier ) . 

  This allowed illegal letter strings to be ruled out at an early stage . 

  Results showed that this algorithm required less time and memory than the PCA . 

  This was partly because of the structure of the lexicon used which enabled efficient storage and search , and cut off non-productive alternatives at an early stage . 

  Srihari and his colleagues decided on their methods partly from consideration of human performance on reading tasks . 

  Hull ( 1986 , 1987 ) has taken this approach further and used an analysis of stages involved in the human reading process to motivate his choice of methods for lexical look-up and comparison . 

  He reports 96 % correct recognition for 12,600 words , and the approach is at least as successful , if not more so , as any reported so far . 

  In his approach , selection of neighbourhoods from a lexicon for search are made on the basis of gross visual similarity . 

  Finer comparisons are then made . 

  While these comparisons consider visual features , and the human literature suggests that at this stage visual information is not involved ( Evett and Humphreys , 1981 ) , Hull's considerations have led him to adopt a neighbourhood approach which is also suggested by the cognitive science literature ( Hull , 1986 ) . 

  He considers that the use of syntax and semantics will be necessary for any further improvement . 

  Text recognition has the same remaining problem as handwriting recognition . 

  That is , once candidate words have been selected , frequently there is more than one allowable candidate . 

  While it seems that there may often be only one candidate , especially for longer words , there will be more than one on a significant number of occasions . 

  The only way in which this ambiguity can be resolved is by appealing to higher levels of information such as syntax , semantics , pragmatics and general knowledge . 

  The grammar of the language can be used to restrict word combinations because they do not combine arbitrarily to form sentences . 

  Knowledge of how word meanings combine at the sentence level can rule out grammatically correct , but semantically implausible sentences . 

  Knowledge of topic of discourse could also aid selection of candidates . 

  Sources of information 

  In the use of n-grams or a dictionary check to rule out letter sequences that do not appear in English , the information needed is a list of English words , or perhaps a large corpus of text from which to extract such a list and/ or the list of n-grams for whichever values of n are necessary . 

  Higher levels of information ( for example syntax and semantics ) must also have some source(s ) for this information ( Evett et al , 1989 ; Keenan and Evett , 1989 ) . 

  Most of this required data is found in a dictionary , and over the past few years more paper dictionaries have become available in machine-readable form . 

  For example Webster's 7th Collegiate Dictionary ( W7 ) ( G and C Merriam and Co. , 1963 ) , Longman's Dictionary of Contemporary English ( LDOCE ) ( Procter , 1978 ) , Collins English Dictionary ( CED ) ( Hanks , 1979 ) , Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary of Current English ( OALDCE ) ( Hornby , 1988 ) , and soon the complete Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ) ( Oxford , 1989 ) . 

  Computational lexicographers have advocated the use of machine-readable dictionaries ( MRDs ) for many uses such as spelling correction , lexical analysis , thesaurus construction , machine translation and so on ( Amsler 1984 ) . 

  Machine-readable dictionaries are often used for natural language understanding and processing systems ( Boguraev and Briscoe , 1987 ; 1988 ) . 

  Currently available dictionaries vary in size and content ( Amsler 1984 , Lesk 1986 ) . 

  Table 1.1 compares the five MRDs listed above . 

  Many machine-readable dictionaries are now available to academics for research purposes , although these are usually in the form of copies of typesetting tapes , and have no accompanying software for operating on the data . 

  Conversion from typesetting version to a usable format or database of the dictionary is a lengthy process ( Weiner , 1985 ; Keenan , 1989 ; Peterson , 1982 ; Boguraev et al , 1987 ; Neff et al , 1988 ) . 

  Walker ( 1986 ) has used the LDOCE ( amongst other machine-readable texts ) to build a text subject assessment system and a concept elaboration system by using the basic definitional information from the dictionary , involving coding of topic or domain information . 

  Lesk ( 1986 ) gives a study of text in definitional parts of dictionary entries and compares currently available machine-readable dictionaries with OED entries which are generally much longer and include many quotations , which he requires for his sense dis-ambiguation system . 

  Lesk explains that " the idea is to select the correct sense of a word by counting overlapping words between the sense definitions and the definitions of the other words in nearby context ... it depends for its success on having fairly long and informative definitions . 

  Thus it is likely to work much better with the OED than with shorter dictionaries " . 

  He goes on to say that " lexically based computer research is growing rapidly . 

  More and more researchers in natural language processing are investing their efforts in dictionaries and lexicons , and efforts are being made to use machine-readable dictionaries instead of constructing lexicons from scratch " . 

  Conclusions 

  The preceding sections have reviewed past and current approaches to the application of lexical context to handwriting and text recognition . 

  These various approaches have a number of problems . 

  For example , whole word recognition techniques are only effective for domains with restricted vocabularies . 

  Segmentation based techniques produce alternative characters and therefore introduce more ambiguity . 

  It has been established that contextual information is necessary in addition to a pattern recogniser . 

  Some systems have employed letter level and word level information , in the form of n-grams or a limited word look-up . 

  The aim of the present system is to improve the recognition rates of a cursive script recogniser by implementing techniques using linguistic information for a large vocabulary . 

  Any higher level processing must begin with orthography , hence this study forms the first part of a contextual system . 

  Lexical , syntactic and semantic information needed for the system can be obtained from a machine-readable dictionary . 

  The following chapters expand on the practical application of reducing the ambiguity produced from a pattern recogniser . 

  This can be achieved by using both n-gram look-up and a lexical check . 

  Techniques for effectively implementing a lexical check by machine are discussed and compared . 

  Other possible requirements of a script recognition system are investigated , including the combination of information from various sources and levels of analysis . 

  The notion of what constitutes a lexical unit is also addressed . 

  Further problems the recognition system may encounter ( for example misspelled words ) are considered , and possible solutions to these problems are proposed . 

  Additional information may be required to provide such solutions , and data structures for the effective storage and retrieval of this information are investigated . 

  1 

  A gram is essentially a sequence of letters where n is the length of the gram . 

  Hence bi-grams ( or di-grams ) are where n = 2 , tri-grams are where n = 3 and so on . 

  2 

  A binary di-gram d ( i , j ) is a 2626 binary matrix that corresponds to letter positions i and j such that i j , in a dictionary of words of fixed length , l . 

  So d ( k , r ) = 1 if and only if some word in the dictionary contains the character a(k ) in position i and a(r ) in position j , where a is the alphabet . 

  All alternatives are zero . 

  Thus these di-grams record their occurrence in a lexical source with position information . 

  3 

  Burr states that suffixed forms of words can be derived by rule . 

  This is not strictly true , since there are many exception forms in English , and there are many pseudo-affixed words . 

  These points are not discussed . 

  4 

  This is a tree-shaped data structure , each node of which is an ordered pair ( l , e ) where l is a letter and e is a boolean flag for the end of a word . 

  The root of the trie is the only exception in that its initial entry is the empty string . 

  Chapter Two 

  Pattern Recognition 

  Introduction 

  The initial stage of a script recognition system involves a pattern recogniser . 

  This stage does not fall within the scope of this thesis , but the interface to the recognition process does form an important part of this work . 

  The output produced by the pattern recogniser becomes the data that must be accepted by the first stage of this system . 

  As script is written , sequences of x , y co-ordinates are collected , coded , and matched to a database . 

  This produces a number of character candidates for each letter position of each word of handwriting processed . 

  Taken together , these character candidates produce a number of letter string candidates for any one word . 

  For short words , the number of candidate strings produced can number in the hundreds , usually number in the thousands for longer words , and can reach millions for words over about twelve letters long . 

  The majority of these candidate strings will be nonsense strings , not English words , and therefore need to be rejected . 

  Given some output from the pattern recogniser , all possible candidate strings should be generated . 

  These strings can then be checked for allowability . 

  Unacceptable strings will be rejected , and acceptable ones are stored for further processing . 

  The Pattern Recogniser 

  The pattern recognition process will be discussed here briefly . 

  A sample of handwriting is collected ( see figure 2.1 for example ) . 

  The writing can be unconnected characters ( e. g. pack ) , connected characters , also known as cursive script ( e. g. extra ) , or some mixture of these two forms ( e. g. bags ) . 

  The recognition system tries to emulate a " normal " writing situation such as pen on paper . 

  Script is written using a digitising tablet ( the " paper " ) and a pen or stylus . 

  To see the script that has been written , such tablets can be overlaid with ordinary paper , and the pen can have an ink-filled ballpoint centre . 

  Alternatively , with the advances in technology , so called " electronic paper " devices are now available . 

  Such devices combine a tablet with a computer screen , usually as an LCD display , and the pens are untethered . 

  Ink is not needed because the LCD display shows the script as it is being written . 

  The tablet used in the initial experiments captures data by sensing ( electromagnetically ) the movement of the stylus across its surface . 

  Data is collected in the form of x , y co-ordinates , along with " pen-up " and " pen-down " signals . 

  The resolution of the tablet is 1000 points per inch . 

  The sequences of co-ordinates are transformed into vector chain codes ( Freeman , 1961 ) whereby changes of direction in the strokes of the pen are converted into a numbered code . 

  Figure 2.2 shows the numbered directions . 

  The chain codes are reduced to five , or fewer codes . 

  A chain code can of course be fewer than five codes because certain letters are formed by strokes of fewer than five directions . 

  For example the letter l ( one direction ) or the letter v ( two directions ) . 

  Figure 2.3 shows a possible Freeman encoding of a handwritten letter a . 

  The pattern recognition has two phases , acquisition and recognition . 

  Firstly samples of handwriting must be acquired to train the database , and secondly this database will be used to attempt recognition of some new samples of script . 

  The acquisition phase can be on-going in order to add new examples of characters to the database . 

  A selection of samples of different people's handwriting were collected and encoded . 

  For the acquisition phase , these Freeman codes are stored in a database which covers each letter of the alphabet , for each person's handwriting . 

  For recognition , as script is written , the Freeman code for each character is compared with the contents of the database , and those entries which match the current code are output as candidate letters , together with a measure of confidence ( an integer between 0 and 100 ) as a guide to how close the match was . 

  The recogniser used by the present system gives up to six candidate letters per letter position of input script . 

  If the script is connected ( cursive ) , the sequence of x , y co-ordinates from the tablet must first be segmented so that comparison with the Freeman database can take place . 

  This process of segmentation is complex and will not be discussed here , nor will other processes involved in the pattern recognition programs , as they do not fall within the scope of this thesis . 

  See Wright ( 1989 ) for further details . 

  Data format 

  As co-ordinates are collected , encoded and recognised , matched characters must be presented to further stages of analysis in some agreed format . 

  Alternative characters must be represented , along with alternative segmentations such as cl or d , lc or k . 

  An example of handwriting such as the word pack shown in figure 2.4 typically produces data similar to that given in figure 2.5 from the pattern recogniser . 

  The lines of data are of the form " line--number alternative--characters [ destinations ] " , and the alternative characters are each of the form " reference--character : confidence " . 

  The line " 0 : 99 [ ... ] " indicates the start of a word , and " ... : 99 [ ] " indicates its finish . 

  The numbers in square brackets give one or more destination numbers , which refer to the line numbers of the sets of candidate letters which can follow at the next character position . 

  For example " 0 : 99 [ 1 7 ] " means that the following position is either line 1 or line 7 . 

  Line 7 is in turn followed by line 3 and so on . 

  Each candidate character has an associated measure of confidence , as described earlier . 

  Combining the character candidates across a complete word gives a number of candidate strings . 

  Taking only the highest priority candidate letters from the data in figure 2.5 , the pattern recogniser would find six candidate strings for this word , namely ljaclc , ljack , ljadc , paclc , pack , and padc . 

  Taking all candidate letters from the data will give many more strings , in this case a total of 1,204 . 

  Calculating the mean of probabilities for each of the candidate letters across the length of the strings ( for example ljaclc = ( 99 + 62 + 100 + 74 + 99 + 75 ) / 6 = 84.83 ) , and ordering the strings on the basis of these results gives table 2.1 below . 

  These results must be improved upon in some way , so that paclc , ljaclc and so on are rejected , but pack is accepted . 

  Although the pattern recogniser gives higher confidences to some characters , these confidences should not be relied upon too heavily . 

  The correct character may often have a lower confidence because it was not such a good match with the Freeman database . 

  This could be for many reasons : for example the database does not contain a good example of that particular form of letter , or the character may have been badly written . 

  Consequently all character candidates should be considered in any further processing . 

  Representation of data 

  The data input to our system is the output from the pattern recogniser as discussed above . 

  Each sample of script collected begins with an optional header . 

  The header contains information about the writer ( e. g. sex , age , handedness etc ) , the date the sample was collected , the style of writing used ( e. g. lower case , upper case , cursive ) , and one or more sentences indicating the script which was written by the subject . 

  Figure 2.6 shows an example file header . 

  A graph structure was chosen as an efficient way of storing all the candidate letters , after Whitrow and Higgins ( 1987 ) . 

  The structure of a graph is such that it will allow checking and searching of pathways between letters from any point in it , in either direction . 

  The graph also gives an economical means of representing a large amount of information in an implicit and flexible format , and provides a record of the input information should further checking become necessary at a later stage . 

  Each node of the graph contains a candidate letter , two integers , and two arrays of pointers . 

  The first integer is the letter's associated confidence ( taken directly from the data , e. g. d has a confidence of 57 ) , and the second integer represents its rank compared to the alternative candidate letters at the same letter position ( e. g. k has rank 1 , and t has rank 2 ) . 

  The first array of pointers points to the candidate letters in the next position within the word , and the second array points to the candidate letters in the previous position . 

  The arrays hold a variable number of pointers , and any unused ones are set to null . 

  Figure 2.7 shows the structure of each node in the graph , and figure 2.8 represents a graph for the data for the input word pack as presented above ( figures 2.4 and 2.5 ) . 

  The links in figure 2.8 represent both forward and backward pointers , but the confidences and ranks are not displayed for simplicity . 

  Generation of candidate strings 

  For the purposes of traversing the graph network to generate all possible candidate strings , the probability correct information is not used , and the worst possible cases are considered . 

  To generate all candidate strings , begin from the start node of the graph ( * ) , take the first route from it ( i. e. the first of the forward pointers ) , and note the letter at the node reached as the first letter of the candidate string . 

  Again take the first route from this node , noting the letter at this next node as the second letter in the candidate string . 

  This process is repeated until the end node of the graph is reached ( ** ) , at which point a complete candidate string has been generated ( e. g. from figure 2.8 , this would have found ljadc ) . 

  Now follow the first backwards pointer ( i. e. back to the node we have just come from , e. g. from the " c " node back to the " d " node ) , and take the next route forwards again ( to the " l " node , giving another complete candidate string ljadl ) . 

  Repeat this process ( through ljadi ) until all routes from that node have been followed ( now followed each of " c " , " l " and " i " routes from the " d " node ) . 

  Then take one step backwards again ( to the " a " node ) and down the next route forwards ( to the " c " node ) , and so on down the first route from each node , until the end of the graph is again reached ( i. e. the complete candidate string ljaclc ) . 

  The stages of this method are repeated as described , until all possible paths are found , ending with the candidate string pnnt , giving 1,204 candidate strings in total i. e. ljadc , ljadl , ljadi , ljaclc , ljacll , ljacli , ljacic , ljacil , ljacii , ... , pnnk , pnnt . 

  This process is complicated to describe , but when expressed computationally it becomes a neat recursive procedure . 

  In fact due to the nature of recursion the backwards pointers are not required . 

  See flowchart D1 in Appendix D. 

  The number of candidate strings generated can be huge , for example a twelve letter word with five candidate letters at each letter position gives 244,140,625 complete candidate strings . 

  See Appendix B for further examples . 

  Checking for allowable strings 

  As previously discussed in chapter one it is possible to use orthographic information to rule out those candidate strings which are not allowable in English . 

  Two techniques which have been used to check strings of characters are n-gram look-up , and a lexical check ( whole word look-up ) . 

  The efficacy of these two techniques will now be compared . 

  Using n-grams , those candidate strings which are found to exist in the list of n-grams are then stored in a list . 

  Those which do not exist are effectively discarded because they are not stored in the list , however they could be regenerated from the graph should that become necessary at some future stage . 

  One reason for this would be if the original script contained spelling errors , so the " correct " word could not be found as a legal English word . 

  Thus a reduced list of candidate strings is produced . 

  The use of n-grams 

  A gram is essentially a sequence of letters where n is the length of the gram . 

  Hence letter sequences of length two are 2-grams ( bi-grams or di-grams ) , of length three are 3-grams ( or tri-grams ) and so on . 

  The use of n-grams requires two stages : firstly the acquisition of lists of n-grams , and secondly candidate strings are checked against the lists as part of the recognition process . 

  For the acquisition phase , the lists of n-grams were derived from a machine readable dictionary ( MRD ) . 

  Each dictionary entry is divided up into sequences of the required gram length . 

  For example to compile a list of 3-grams , one and two letter entries would be ignored , and three letter entries stored as they are . 

  Dictionary entries more than three letters long are divided into their 3-gram components . 

  Table 2.2 shows some examples . 

  The whole dictionary is processed in this way , a frequency count for each gram is collected , and each gram has a flag which is set to true if it occurs as a separate word ( i. e. dictionary entry length equals required gram length ) . 

  Table 2.3 illustrates some 3-gram entries . 

  For the recognition phase , a candidate string can either be compared with a list of grams of the same length as itself , or it can be divided into sequences of shorter grams ( in the same way as described above for the acquisition phase ) and compared with a list of grams of this shorter length . 

  If all these separate grams occur then the candidate string can be said to be allowable . 

  If at least one of the separate grams does not occur , the candidate string is not allowable , and is therefore discarded . 

  The frequency count collected for each gram can be used as a way of deciding which grams to include if rarer items are to be excluded . 

  They could also be used to calculate a measure of likelihood correct for accepted candidate strings . 

  Experiments using n-grams 

  The list of n-grams collected was first built into a binary tree structure for ease of searching before comparison takes place ( see chapter three for further discussion of memory structures ) . 

  It is interesting to note that the majority of processing time is taken up by building the tree of grams , the traversing of the graph and comparison with the tree was negligible . 

  Two different lists were compiled , and the same data set run against them . 

  The first list was a set of n-grams taken from a short dictionary ( 11,795 words ) , and the second was a list of n-grams taken from a larger dictionary ( 71,279 words ) . 

  Both lists were formed from the Medical Research Council Psycholinguistic Database ( Wilson , 1987 ) by excluding repetitions , rare usages , plurals and derived forms . 

  Tables 2.4 to 2.6 show the results from various experiments1 . 

  From tables 2.4 and 2.5 it can be seen that as gram size increases , processing time increases ( because a larger tree takes longer to build ) , but the shorter lists are comparatively quick to build , and give the best reduction . 

  The long list of grams tended to allow candidate strings that an average reader would not accept as real words , so there appears to be good evidence for restricting the dictionary . 

  The major problem with the use of n-grams is that the candidate strings remaining after look-up are not guaranteed to be words . 

  This is an undesirable situation because a user of a script recognition system would not expect to write a word , and have it recognised as something which is not a word . 

  Hence experiments utilising a lexical check were carried out . 

  Experiments using a lexical check 

  The above n-gram experiment was repeated using only those grams which were flagged as being a word . 

  The list of words were taken from a shorter dictionary ( 21,211 words ) . 

  Much better reduction is given by the lexical check of candidate strings compared with the n-gram results . 

  More sensible results are achieved because the output strings are guaranteed to be words . 

  Processing times are also much reduced due to the lists of words being shorter than the lists of grams . 

  The use of n-grams was therefore discontinued . 

  The main problem in the past for systems using lexical checks has been the amount of memory available for the representation of the word list . 

  With recent advances in technology , even personal computers now have much increased memory capacity , so a lexical look-up technique which uses a large vocabulary ( say , anything over 20,000 words ) is now feasible . 

  However there is still the problem of exactly what to include in the word list . 

  Methods for effectively representing the word list in memory to provide fast look-up times in a reasonably sized structure will be discussed in chapter three . 

  Conclusions 

  The output from the pattern recogniser is poor , and requires further processing to improve . 

  Methods commonly used for such processing involve using transitional probabilities ( for example the Viterbi algorithm or Markov modelling ) , using information about how letters combine ( for example n-grams ) , using lexical look-up , or combinations of these . 

  Statistical methods involve selecting one " correct " answer and thus have a built-in margin of error , and the use of n-gram information does not guarantee the output to be words . 

  We have shown that a lexical look-up is more effective than n-grams in terms of reduction of candidate strings . 

  Not only does a lexical check give a greater reduction in the number of candidates , but also a more useful reduction because it guarantees the output will be words ( see also Higgins and Ford , 1989 ) . 

  The lexical look-up technique is preferable to statistical methods since it does not have a built-in error rate and guarantees lexical output . 

  The limitation of this method is that an input word may not be included in the look-up vocabulary ) , however this is unavoidable . 

  This particular problem also exists for statistical methods since they sample from the language and assume a reliable distribution . 

  The pattern recogniser and lexical check are currently two separate stages in the recognition system . 

  The number of candidate strings even for short words is ridiculously large , and many of the letter sequences in such strings contain non-occurring sequences . 

  The pattern recognition output could be improved by checking some ( or all ) letter sequences against either lists of n-grams ( bi-grams would be fastest ) or even against words . 

  Thus unacceptable strings could be rejected at an earlier stage , leaving fewer for the lexical look-up to check . 

  This process would therefore become much faster . 

  Taken to its natural conclusion , the stages of pattern recognition and lexical checking could become interactive processes . 

  The two techniques could be combined in some suitable fashion to provide a fast pattern recogniser with lexical output . 

  Chapter Three 

  Word Recognition 

  Introduction 

  In chapter two we established that the most effective way of reducing the ambiguity produced by the pattern recogniser is by a lexical look-up which discards candidate strings that are not allowable in English . 

  The chosen lexicon or word list must be represented in computer memory , but there are numerous methods which could be employed to do this , in order that it can easily be searched . 

  However each of these methods has advantages and disadvantages , and the suitability for a particular situation will depend on many factors . 

  For example : 

  the ease of construction of the data structure ; 

  the speed of construction of the data structure ; 

  the ease of searching the data structure ; 

  the speed of searching the data structure ; 

  the amount of memory used by the data structure ; 

  the ease of alteration of the data structure ( i. e. adding and deleting items ) ; 

  the efficiency of representation of the data so that its particular features are succinctly expressed , and can easily be retrieved and analysed . 

  Not all of these factors will apply in every situation , and some will be more important than others . 

  In the case of a lexicon or word list , especially within the context of a script recognition system , the speed of searching the list is paramount , especially for unsuccessful searches , in order to obtain almost immediate recognition . 

  This also means that the ease of searching is very important , but in a commercial package running in a single workstation environment , the amount of memory used should be kept to a minimum . 

  Efficient update of the data structure may be important if the word list is to be changed frequently -- such as adding technical terms and proper nouns . 

  The initial construction of the data structure is of little importance to the user since it is rarely performed . 

  Alternative data structures 

  Looking at possible data structures for representing such a word list , there are many standard methods ( Knuth , 1973 ; Wirth , 1976 ; Korsh , 1980 ; Standish , 1980 ; Claybrook , 1983 ; Amsbury , 1985 ; Stubbs and Webre , 1985 ) , for example lists ( stacks , queues ) , trees ( binary , B , multi-way ) , graphs and hash tables to name a few . 

  List structures 

  The simplest structure in which to store a lexicon would be an array . 

  However this is a static structure , it is necessary to know in advance how many items will be stored in order to allocate the correct amount of memory . 

  Not knowing the number of items will result in wasted space due to over allocation . 

  Each element of the array could be a fixed length character string , but this would be quite wasteful of memory as this fixed length would have to be enough to fit the longest word in the list . 

  As the majority of the words would be shorter than this , there would a large amount of wasted space . 

  The words could be stored contiguously in an array , so each element of the array would in effect be just a character , and each word would have to be terminated with a dummy character , for example a null character . 

  This would be a memory efficient structure ( one byte per letter , plus one byte for the null , for each word ) , however searching such a structure would be sequential , and therefore slow , of O(n ) , where n is the number of words in the lexicon . 

  The whole array would need to be searched to establish whether or not a given word was stored , unless the words are stored in alphabetical order . 

  In this case a sequential search would be of O(n/ 2 ) , on average only half of the array would be searched , for both successful and unsuccessful searches . 

  This could be speeded up to O ( log2 n ) if a binary search technique were employed . 

  Instead of beginning a search at the start of the structure ( i. e. first element of the array ) , the binary search technique begins at a mid point . 

  The item stored at this mid-point is compared with the item being searched for . 

  If the searched-for item is less than the mid-point ( for words this means the searched-for item comes earlier in the alphabet than the item at the mid-point ) , then the search continues in the first half of the structure , if it is greater , the search continues in the second half of the structure . 

  Whichever half is to be searched , a mid-point is chosen again , and the process is repeated . 

  At any stage , if the comparison shows that the items are equal , then the search terminates successfully . 

  An unsuccessful search terminates when the end points of the section of the list being searched are in fact next to each other , and neither matches the searched-for item . 

  Search times are of O ( log2 n ) on average , and will be the worst case for all unsuccessful searches ( Knuth , 1973 ) . 

  The lexicon storage structure can be created dynamically rather than statically . 

  This means that it is not necessary to know the total number of items in advance , because each item is a separately allocated piece of memory . 

  This type of structure is known as a linked list , because each item is linked to the next by a pointer . 

  Linked lists can be used to implement stacks and queues . 

  A stack works on the principle of " last in first out " ( LIFO ) . 

  New items are pushed onto the top of the stack , and an item is popped off the top of the stack to retrieve it . 

  The first item stored becomes the bottom of the stack . 

  A queue follows the principle " first in first out " ( FIFO ) . 

  The first item stored becomes the head of the queue and new items are added onto the end , or tail of the queue . 

  Neither stacks nor queues are appropriate to store a list of words because of their FIFO and LIFO storage and access principles , however the linked list structure can be used . 

  Figure 3.1 shows a representation of an ordered linked list for the small lexicon cat , catch , cot , cots , do , dog , dogged , doggy . 

  Each node in the structure contains one word and one pointer to the next word in the list . 

  This data structure is extremely simple to implement , but the search times are large , O(n ) for an unordered list , O(n/ 2 ) for an ordered list , because the search must be sequential . 

  The construction of such a list is very fast if built from an already alphabetically ordered list , because new items are simply added onto the end of the list . 

  It is much slower , O(n2 ) , if the words are not already ordered because new items must be inserted into the correct position in the list . 

  This means the structure must first be searched to establish the correct position for insertion . 

  Binary tree structures 

  The binary search technique described earlier can be used with a dynamically allocated structure . 

  This structure is known as a binary tree , and neatly encodes the mid-point information needed for searching . 

  It has faster search times than the simple linked list , but greater memory overheads because each node has two pointers . 

  See figure 3.2 . 

  The searching and building of the binary tree structure are both straightforward , and the word list becomes ordered due to nature of the tree . 

  For each node , every word in its left sub-tree precedes the word at the parent node in the alphabet , and every word in its right sub-tree follows it in the alphabet . 

  Either pointer can be null , and leaf nodes in the tree are those nodes at which both the left and right pointers are null . 

  This is known as a random binary search tree . 

  When searching the binary tree , a comparison is made between the word at the root of the tree and the string being searched for . 

  If they are not equal , either the left sub-tree is searched , or the right is searched , depending upon whether the required string precedes the root word in the alphabet , or follows it . 

  This process continues until the required string is found in the tree , or until a leaf node is reached , which means that the required string does not exist in the tree . 

  Search times are approximately O ( log2 n ) . 

  Binary trees can easily become unbalanced . 

  A balanced tree is one in which the number of levels hanging from its left branch is very close to the number of levels hanging from its right branch . 

  For a perfectly balanced tree , also known as an AVL tree1 , the height of the two branches should differ by at most one level . 

  Search times are quicker , approaching O ( log2 n ) , if a tree is balanced , but the construction time and complexity of such a tree is greater than that of the random binary search tree which is not checked for balance . 

  A perfectly balanced binary search tree is fastest to search , but is complex to maintain ( Knuth , 1973 ; Wirth , 1976 ; Standish , 1980 ; Claybrook , 1983 ; Stubbs and Webre , 1985 ) . 

  The random binary search tree is easiest to implement , but care must be taken in the construction of the word list . 

  The first item in the list is taken as the root of the tree , so if it is built from an alphabetically ordered word list , a degenerate tree will result , where all the left pointers will be null ( Knuth , 1973 , p426 ; Claybrook , 1983 , p95 ) . 

  This is the equivalent of a linear list , but more wasteful of space . 

  A " zig-zag " tree structure can result from building from a list such as : cat , doggy , catch , dogged , cot , dog , cots , do . 

  The left and right pointers will alternately be null . 

  Degenerate trees can be avoided simply by " disordering " the list and ensuring that the first item is from approximately the mid-point of the lexicon . 

  This disordering was performed by reversing each string , sorting the list alphabetically , and reversing each string again . 

  The middle item was then moved to the top of the list . 

  The binary tree in figure 3.2 was constructed from the resulting list : do , dogged , catch , dog , cots , cat , cot , doggy . 

  Multi-way tree structures 

  Multi-way trees are trees which have more than two pointers leading from each node . 

  They are faster to search than binary trees ( Fredkin , 1960 ; Knuth , 1973 ) , and for this particular application it is apparent that a 26-way tree would be the most efficient structure in order to take full advantage of the alphabet . 

  Unsuccessful searches will always be faster in a multi-way tree than in a binary search tree , which suits our purpose as the majority of strings being searched for will not be in the word list . 

  For example , of the 1,204 candidate strings from the data given earlier ( section 2.3 ) , only 3 strings are allowable , namely pack , pact and pant . 

  B-trees 

  B-trees are a form of multi-way tree where the growth of a tree is restricted ( Bayer and McCreight , 1972 ; Knuth , 1973 ) . 

  A B-tree is balanced , in other words the tree is symmetrical so that all paths through it are the same length , so all leaf nodes appear on the same level , and carry no information . 

  A B-tree is said to be of order m when every node has at least m/ 2 children , and at most m children , except the root and the leaf nodes . 

  The root has at least two children , unless it is a leaf . 

  Insertions are quite simple in B-trees , every leaf corresponds to a place where a new insertion might happen , however deletions are slightly more complicated . 

  B-trees are very good for storing numbers ( for example ORACLE the relational database stores its indexes as B-trees ) , but it is not clear that they are particularly useful for storing words . 

  26-way tree 

  The 26-way tree is a multi-way tree with 26 pointers leading from each node . 

  Searching is simple , efficient and fast , as is the construction of the tree , however the memory overhead is vast . 

  Each node contains one letter rather than one word , thus allowing for the study of sub-word letter sequences , but to make the searching algorithm most efficient , all 26 routes from every node in the tree must be allowed for , and on average most of these are wasted . 

  Using two experimental word lists of 14,769 items and 79,065 items , the mean number of routes used is 1/ 26 , and just less than 1/ 26 respectively . 

  Each node has a flag which is set if that letter is an end of word ( see figure 3.3 ) . 

  Obviously this memory overhead can be greatly reduced by only allocating space for those routes which are used ( i. e. an n-ary tree where n is variable between 0 and 26 ) , for example typical routes from " z " would be " e " , " i " and " o " . 

  However , when searching for a particular route from the " z " , a linear search must be employed to establish whether it exists or not , which slows down the search time compared with the 26-way tree where all 26 routes are allocated . 

  Trie structures 

  Another type of multi-way tree is often known as a trie ( from the word " retrieval " , but pronounced as " try " to distinguish it from " tree " in speech ) and was first introduced by Fredkin ( Fredkin , 1960 ; Knuth , 1973 ) . 

  A trie takes advantage of the redundancy of common prefixes , and is essentially an m-ary tree , because each node specifies an m-way branch . 

  There are many alternative implementations of trie memory , in fact the 26-way tree just described could be said to be a type of trie . 

  Figure 3.4 shows a trie ( for the lexicon cat , catch , cot , cots , do , dog , dogged , doggy ) after Knuth . 

  Starting with the first position of the word being searched for , the trie is checked in column 1 . 

  If the word begins with " c " or " d " , the trie is followed to the address ( column number ) specified , hence words beginning with " c " go to column 2 , and with " d " go to column 7 . 

  Words beginning with other characters are ( in this example ) not represented . 

  The second letter of the word is now checked . 

  Stored words in column 2 represent " ca " and " co " , again no other sequences are allowed . 

  The addresses are followed until words become unique . 

  For example in column 4 are found the words " catch " and " cat " . 

  Figure 3.5 shows a binary trie for the same lexicon , after Srihari ( Srihari et al , 1983 ) who implemented a trie to represent a lexicon , but only for 1,724 words ( see figure 1.1 ) . 

  This method of storage is an inefficient use of memory compared to a binary search tree or to the original word list , but searching is much faster for both the acceptance and rejection of a given string . 

  Knuth has shown that this will take on average O ( log2 n / log2 m ) iterations , where n is the size of the lexicon and m is the order of the trie . 

  A trie neatly allows the study of sub-word letter sequences , i. e. it allows the immediate determination of whether or not an initial sub-string is valid . 

  A binary trie is different from the binary tree described earlier because the two pointers leading out of a node have different functions , and there is one letter per node , rather than one word per node . 

  The first pointer leads to other possibilities at that position in a word ( alternative , brother or sibling pointers ) , and the second one leads to possibilities for the next position in a word ( son or child pointers ) . 

  There must also be an end of word flag . 

  Tree compression 

  It is important to keep the amount of memory required by any structure to a minimum . 

  There are many ways in which this can be achieved . 

  So-called compression methods generally apply to particularly wasteful areas of the structure , and reduce , or compress , these areas to use smaller amounts of memory ( Knuth , 1973 ) . 

  It is easy to see that tree structures representing lexicons ( such as those just described ) are wasteful of memory because on average there is only one route leading from any node . 

  For every word ending in the letter sequence -ing , there is a separate set of three nodes in the tree , one for the i , which points to the node for the n , which in turn points to the node for the g . 

  In a lexicon of just over 70,000 words nearly 6,000 end in the sequence -ing . 

  It is a similar situation for the ending -ed , and there are also large numbers of words ending with -er , and -tion . 

  A large amount of memory could be saved if each occurrence of the same sequence of letters used the same set of nodes in the tree structure . 

  For example , in a tree where each nodes takes 16 bytes , compressing the -ed endings would save 196448 bytes . 

  If -ed , -ing , -er and -tion are all compressed , the tree representing just over 70,000 words would be reduced from 2,628,928 bytes to 1,972,416 bytes . 

  However , such reductions are only possible if the word ending forms a unique route in the tree , and not if the ending is part of other words . 

  For example walked , walking and walker could be compressed , but alarming could not , because it forms part of alarmingly . 

  Compressing this occurrence of -ing would lead to the false impression that walkingly is a word . 

  It is not just at the ends of words where compression methods can be applied . 

  Words such as aardvark use a number of nodes which are not shared with any other words . 

  Ideally these unique sequences of nodes could be reduced into one single node ( in a similar way to the mixed-method tree described in section 3.3.2 ) . 

  However such hybrid techniques mean the searching algorithm is not quite so straightforward , which is a major disadvantage for this type of application . 

  Directed acyclic word graphs 

  It is not just at the ends of words where common letter sequences can make use of the same nodes in a tree structure . 

  This can be taken advantage of at any point within a word . 

  A tree can be constructed where this process is taken to its optimal conclusion , so that all possible common letter sequences are shared . 

  This structure is actually a graph rather than a tree , and is known as a Directed Acyclic Word Graph ( dawg ) . 

  The dawg is the most efficient implementation in terms of memory ( Blumer et al , 1985 ; Appel and Jacobson , 1988 ; Elliman and Lancaster , 1990 ) . 

  Appel and Jacobson stored 94,240 words in 175 Kbytes . 

  A diagram showing a dawg structure of the lexicon used so far would in fact be no different from the trie in figure 3.5 . 

  However using the lexicon car , cars , cat , cats , do , dog , dogs , done , ear , ears , eat , eats ( after Appel and Jacobson ) , the features of the dawg can be clearly demonstrated , especially when compared with the equivalent trie . 

  Figure 3.6 shows a trie representation of the above lexicon , figure 3.7 shows the dawg , and figure 3.8 shows a dawg represented as a finite state recogniser of the same lexicon . 

  This is how Appel and Jacobson represent it . 

  A dawg is basically a trie where all equivalent sub-tries ( i. e. identical patterns of acceptable word endings ) have been merged . 

  Appel and Jacobson represent their dawg as a finite-state recogniser of the lexicon . 

  Nodes of the graph are the states of the finite-state machine , edges of the graph are the transitions of the machine , and terminal nodes are the accepting states . 

  The language of a finite-state recogniser is the set of words that it will accept . 

  For any language there will be many different finite-state recognisers . 

  In particular there will be one with a minimum number of states , which is the one represented by the dawg . 

  Taking the node in figures 3.6 and 3.7 to be 10 bytes ( 2 chars and 2 pointers , assuming 4 bytes for a pointer , i. e. a 32 bit word length machine ) , the trie would use 180 bytes ( 18 nodes 10 bytes each ) , whereas the dawg would use only 110 bytes ( 11 nodes ) . 

  Search times should be the same because the same node structure can be used , but building times would probably be much greater for the dawg . 

  This is because the structure is more complex , and additional searches would need to be made to check whether paths already exist . 

  For the trie , the current structure is searched as far as possible following the sequence of letters in the new word to be added . 

  When the required path does not exist , new nodes are allocated to build it . 

  To add a new word into the dawg , the current structure would need to be searched both forwards and backwards to establish whether or not the required paths exist , which would slow down the building algorithm ( see section 3.3.3 ) . 

  The dawg could probably be further reduced by replacing common suffixes such as -ing , -tion , and -ed with a single node ( as discussed with reference to tree structures in section 3.2.4 ) . 

  Given the nature of the dawg , it could also be made two-way , or bi-directional . 

  This would be searchable in either direction , which could be useful in some parallel application for string searching , or just allowing for reverse searching because the end of the string is more restrictive . 

  However due to the effective doubling of the number of paths through the dawg , making it bi-directional would increase its size ( Appel and Jacobson , 1988 ) . 

  Hashing 

  There is a class of popular storage and search methods known as hashing ( hash encoding ) or scatter storage techniques ( Knuth , 1973 ; Aho et al , 1983 ; Cooper and Clancy , 1985 ; see also section 5.4.3 ) . 

  An arithmetical calculation is performed on a particular item ( in this case a word ) , thereby computing a function ( known as the hashing function ) which gives the location of the item ( and any associated data ) in a table -- the hash table . 

  This method is applied both for storing items in the table , and for searching for items in a previously stored structure . 

  Hashing functions often indicate the same hash table entry . 

  Although such clashes are difficult to avoid , straight-forward methods can be employed to resolve them . 

  Hashing techniques are very fast , but do not allow the study of sub-word letter sequences , which is particularly important in this case , as explained in section 3.3 below . 

  The optimum size of hash table can only be determined if the approximate number of items to be stored is known . 

  Implementations 

  Several types of tree structures were implemented for comparison : a binary tree ( section 3.2.2 ) , a 26-way tree ( section 3.2.3.2 ) , a reduced memory tree ( section 3.3.1 ) , two linked list mixed-method trees ( section 3.3.2 ) , one using the 26-way tree structure , and the other using the reduced memory structure , a binary trie ( section 3.2.3.3 ) and a directed acyclic word graph ( section 3.2.5 ) . 

  The binary tree structure was found to be very straightforward to implement and use , but slow in look-up times , so multi-way trees were investigated . 

  It was thought that the fastest look-up would be achieved using a 26-way tree , so that was implemented , and found to be extremely efficient , but the memory overhead was too large for practical purposes . 

  Other multi-way trees were not implemented due to increase in search times ( e. g. B-trees , section 3.2.3.1 ) over the 26-way tree . 

  Hash coding methods ( section 3.2.6 ) were also not implemented as they do not allow for the study of sub-word letter sequences . 

  The part 26-way tree , part linked list method was implemented for comparison purposes , and because it appeared to be a simple way of reducing the amount of memory necessary . 

  The trie structure requires less memory than the 26-way tree , and look-up times are also fast . 

  See section 3.3.4 and section 3.3.5 for results of comparisons of implementations . 

  Using the binary tree structure , a successful search is when a node in the tree is reached containing the candidate string . 

  If a leaf node is reached , the search is unsuccessful . 

  Using the 26-way tree , a search is successful if each of the candidate letters in the string can be followed to the next one , and if the last letter in the string is flagged for end-of-word in the tree . 

  This means that if at any stage the required pointer to the next letter does not exist , the search is unsuccessful . 

  Therefore the search can be terminated before the complete candidate string is generated from the graph of data ( see section 2.4 and figure 2.8 ) . 

  Each letter can be individually checked against the tree to see if that particular path exists . 

  For example , if the candidate string starts with the letter b , check from the head of the tree to see if the 2nd of the 26 pointers is set . 

  If it is , follow the route down the tree to the " b " node , and get the next letter from the graph of data . 

  Let us say the next letter is e ( i. e. candidate string be ) -- look down the 5th of the 26 pointers from the " b " node to see if it is set , and so on , until the end of the candidate string is reached . 

  If at any point the required pointer in the tree is null , then that candidate string and all candidate strings beginning with those letters can not be allowable , because no words in the tree begin with that sequence of letters . 

  The next candidate letter at the present position in the graph is then tried . 

  This procedure continues until the end of the graph is reached . 

  A complete candidate string is only allowable if the end-of-word flag is set at the node in the tree for the last letter of the string ( see flowchart D2 in Appendix D ) . 

  These candidate strings are compared against the 26-way tree of words ( figure 3.3 ) . 

  As each candidate string is generated , its successive letters are tested for existence in the tree . 

  If all such letters are found , the algorithm checks whether the resulting string is a word ( i. e. the end-of-word flag is set at the tree-node reached by the search ) . 

  This process results in only one allowable string : cots . 

  These comparisons are illustrated in the table 3.2 below . 

  An example word supercilious , compiled from simulated data ( 244,140,625 complete candidate strings ) was tested using the old method of complete string look-up ( 7 hours and 48 minutes processing time ) , and the new letter by letter look-up ( 13 seconds processing time ) -- these figures include the time taken to build the tree structure as well as searching for the candidate strings . 

  However on short words , the difference in processing times was not so great . 

  A test sentence from data from the recogniser ( both wizened men quickly judged four sharp vixens ) took 17 seconds to build and search the tree using the old method , whereas the new method took 13 seconds . 

  Reduced memory method 

  An alternative method was devised which includes the advantages of the 26-way tree method , but reduces memory considerably ( see figure 3.9 ) . 

  Instead of having 26 pointers to indicate the next letters in words , the new method uses a 32-bit integer , 26 bits of which are set ( i. e. = 1 ) if that letter is allowable , and not ( i. e. = 0 ) if that letter is not allowable . 

  The end of word flag is the most significant bit , leaving five bits unused in which to encode the letter for that particular node . 

  Each node also has one pointer which if used , points to a variable length array of pointers to nodes ( each node is 32 bits + 1 pointer ) , so from the above example , there would be 10 elements in the array because 10 out of 26 bits are set . 

  ( See figure 3.6 ) . 

  When searching for a particular string , it is immediately apparent at any node , whether the required route from that node exists or not by checking the relevant bit of the 26 flags . 

  If and only if it does , that route is followed , which means counting how many of the 26 bits are set up to and including the required one , to establish which member of the pointer array to follow to the next level in the tree . 

  It is this count which increases the search time from the original 26-way tree , but the decrease in memory usage is so great as to out weigh this slower search . 

  For example , if the search is for the string chess , h is the 3rd bit of the 26 to be set , so follow the 3rd pointer of the 10 element array to reach the " h " node on the level below , and so on until the entire string is found , at the 2nd " s " node , where the word flag is set . 

  Mixed-method tree structures 

  There is an optimum point in the 26-way tree , below which it is more economical in memory to represent the remaining parts of the words in a linked list than in the standard tree nodes . 

  This was suggested by Sussenguth ( 1963 , see also Knuth , 1973 ) . 

  See figure 3.10 . 

  Knuth ( 1973 , p483 ) explains that we " can save memory space at the expense of running time if we use a linked list for each node vector , since most of the entries tend to be empty " , which certainly applies to our lists of words . 

  So this can save considerably on memory , without substantially increasing search times , however the building of such a mixed-method tree would be both awkward and slow due to all the list manipulation necessary when adding new items . 

  For example , once a list goes beyond the optimal number , it must be un-linked , and the words built into the standard 26-way node method , with new items added in linked lists hanging from these new nodes , until they in turn reach the optimal value , and so on . 

  If the data produces an exactly balanced tree , then this optimal point would be at the same level across all branches ( Sussenguth , 1963 ) , but this is not so with a lexicon , so the construction is much more difficult . 

  This method was in fact implemented to establish its characteristics and for comparison with other methods , by building the tree as usual , and then pruning the branches to give the required structure as in figure 3.10 . 

  Comparisons of implementations are discussed below ( section 3.3.4 ) . 

  Dawg 

  An attempt was made to construct the dawg shown in figure 3.7 from an ASCII word list . 

  Whilst the algorithm detailed in Appendix D ( flowchart D3 ) was under development , it became clear that this representation was not the best for this particular structure . 

  This is because multi-way nodes are represented via alternative ( brother ) pointers , and as new words are added , non-words are often introduced . 

  Figure 3.11 shows a dawg for the words stable , stabbed , stole , stolen , stable and dabbed . 

  However the non-words dable , dole , dolen , doles , stoles , dablen , dables and stablen have been introduced . 

  This means that to use the node structure from the trie , few routes would be able to be re-used , resulting in a dawg which is little different from the original trie ( figure 3.6 ) . 

  An alternative structure was devised which is similar to the finite-state recogniser in figure 3.8 , having labelled edges . 

  The nodes are numbered for reference whilst the dawg is under construction ( see figure 3.12 ) . 

  A first pass program keeps a record of available head and tail strings of words already stored in the dawg , and produces a list of transitions between the nodes , or states of the dawg . 

  The available head and tail strings are stored in hash tables for speed of searching . 

  As a new word is read from the ASCII file , the head list is searched for the longest string available from the start of the word . 

  When this is established ( it may be the empty string ) the tail list is searched to find the longest string available from the remaining part of the word ( i. e. the word minus the head string ) . 

  Again this may be an empty string . 

  A flowchart of this algorithm is given in Appendix D ( flowchart D3 ) . 

  The dawg will diverge from the node at the end of the head string , and converge again at the first node of the tail string . 

  The divergent and convergent nodes are joined by adding nodes for any letters from the middle part of the word which are not yet in the dawg . 

  The transitions involved in these new nodes are printed out . 

  Figure 3.12 produces the following transitions : 

  Constructing new nodes in the dawg produces additional head and tail strings , so these are added to the lists . 

  Finally any head string which uses the convergent node number must be removed as it is no longer available . 

  Any tail string which uses the divergent node number is also removed for the same reason . 

  This is done to ensure non-words are not introduced . 

  Cycles can be introduced into the dawg if the divergent and convergent node numbers are equal . 

  This must be checked for -- if it is the case , a new head string with one fewer letter is used instead . 

  The list of transitions produced by the first program is sorted ( numerically , by the first node number ) , and the node numbers are converted into edge numbers , by a simple nawk ( Aho et al , 1988 ) program . 

  A second pass program builds a dawg of labelled edges ( as shown in figure 3.13 ) without reference to nodes , from the list of edge connections . 

  The edges are stored in an array , so the edge number is its array index . 

  Each element of the array stores the letter for the current edge , and an index to which edge follows ( the equivalent of a child pointer ) . 

  Multi-way nodes are represented by a " continued " flag stored for each edge . 

  If this flag is set , then the current edge has alternatives ( brothers ) . 

  The list of transitions above yields the following set of edges : 

  Memory requirements for the construction and storage of a dawg for various word lists are given in section 3.3.5 ( table 3.6 ) . 

  The exact formation of the resulting dawg varies depending upon the order in which the words are presented . 

  Figures 3.14 and 3.15 show alternative dawgs which represent the same three words but presented in different orders . 

  For longer word lists , this can result in a different number of nodes ( and therefore edges ) . 

  This is because the sets of head and tail strings available at any point may be different . 

  Consequently the amount of memory required for a dawg will also vary . 

  Table 3.3 shows some alternative orderings for a word list of 2461 words , together with the number of edges needed to represent them in a dawg structure . 

  Obviously the order in which the words are presented to the dawg building algorithm is important in order to keep the amount of memory used to a minimum . 

  There will probably be an optimal ordering of the words which will give a minimal dawg , and further experiments should be performed to discover this ordering . 

  Initial comparisons 

  Four trees were constructed from the same word lists , and candidate strings from a test sentence checked against them . 

  The results in table 3.4 were obtained for the test sentence : mary had a little lamb its fleece was white as snow and everywhere that mary went the lamb was sure to go 

  Search times for the 26-way tree are fastest of the above methods , although it is very wasteful of memory . 

  Especially for a large word list the memory requirements are prohibitive . 

  Using the linked list method , the amount of memory used is much more acceptable , and there is virtually no change in speed for either tree structure . 

  The reduced memory method has extremely reasonable memory requirements , although longer search times for the short word list compared with both 26-way tree methods . 

  The most interesting result is that it gives quicker search times for a long word list over the 26-way methods . 

  This is because the large 26-way tree ( over 15Mb ) had to page ( swap ) its memory , because it was running on a file server with only 12Mb of physical memory . 

  For comparison purposes it is interesting to note that searching a sequential ASCII file using a standard Unix command ( grep ) takes approximately two minutes to look for the 22 words of the test sentence , not including all the alternative candidate strings for each of these word positions . 

  The word list takes 0.7 Mb to store in this ASCII form . 

  Experiments have shown that the shorter ( 14,769 item ) word list contains insufficient items for practical purposes ( i. e. the correct words were not found in the list ) , so search times for longer lists should be considered more important . 

  There are disadvantages in using too long a list , in that more of the candidate strings will be allowable , and depending on the MRD that the list is taken from , can contain rare words that most native speakers would not recognise as " real " words . 

  For example the input word cake gave allowable candidates including roke , loke and boke . 

  It is considered better therefore to have a longer set of allowable candidate strings which includes the correct word although this may often include rarely occurring words . 

  A shorter lexicon will discard the correct words on too many occasions . 

  The exact size of the word list should depend on the recognition application . 

  Given all these factors , the simple reduced memory method would be most appropriate to the situation , being the optimum for memory size and search times for the 60,144 word list . 

  It is also simpler to construct than a linked list mixed-method . 

  Further comparisons 

  After these initial comparisons had been completed , further experiments took place which included a trie structure . 

  The results in table 3.5 were obtained for the same test sentence . 

  It can be seen that the trie was in fact faster to search than the reduced memory tree in all three cases , however it uses more memory ( approximately one and a half times as much as the reduced memory tree ) . 

  It is also a particularly useful structure because it allows further information to be stored at the nodes . 

  Further improvements could be made to either a tree or a trie structure by using a method of tail end compression ( section 3.2.5 ) . 

  Common endings of words ( for example -ed , -ing , -tion ) which are at present duplicated in the tree for words like walked , walking , shouted , shouting , can be grouped together . 

  This would not affect the speed of look-up , but would again decrease the memory requirements . 

  Ultimately a dawg structure ( section 3.2.5 and section 3.3.3 ) gives the best memory reduction ( see table 3.6 ) . 

  The look-up speed should be similar to the trie ( although this has not yet been established ) , but build times are much greater , especially for larger lexicons ( for example 5,705 words takes approximately 10 minutes to build , but 68,856 words takes just over 11 hours 3 ) . 

  Unfortunately , using the dawg means that any additional information about words ( e. g. grammatical category ) would have to be stored elsewhere ( section 5.4.3 ) . 

  The current dawg structure requires eight bytes per edge . 

  This comprises a char for the letter ( 1 byte ) , a boolean for the continued flag ( 1 byte ) and a long integer for the next edge index ( 4 bytes ) -- a total of 6 bytes which is rounded up to the nearest word boundary ( on a Sun Sparc 2 file server ) , hence 8 bytes . 

  This information for each edge could be packed into one 32-bit word ( 7 bits for the letter , 1 bit for the flag and 24 bits for the index ) , which would be only 4 bytes per edge . 

  The last column in table 3.6 gives the memory requirement figures if this packing were carried out . 

  The penultimate column gives the current memory requirements , which are twice what is necessary . 

  It was not possible to compare the 26-way tree , reduced memory tree and trie directly with the dawg because the word lists used in the earlier experiments were no longer available . 

  The test runs were also performed on a different machine so it makes little sense to compare timings . 

  There also seemed little point in rebuilding the earlier tree structures with new word lists on the latest machines . 

  Faster building of lexicon structure 

  Whichever tree structure is chosen , the time taken to build the structure from an ASCII word list is a few minutes for approximately 70,000 words . 

  This time is taken up by reading each word from the ASCII file , working through it letter by letter , allocating any new nodes required and setting up the pointers correctly . 

  It would be preferable to perform this process once only . 

  The resulting structure can be saved in memory to be loaded each time the system starts up . 

  This loading process is very fast ( a few seconds for the same 70,000 words ) because there is effectively only one piece of data to be read , instead of 70,000 . 

  This can be achieved by separating the building process into two stages . 

  Firstly the lexicon is pre-processed by using an array to hold the tree nodes , so that the memory required is allocated in one contiguous amount , rather than dynamically allocating each node . 

  The pointers at each node become array indices rather than true memory addresses , but the structure is functionally unchanged . 

  The nodes are built up per word , letter by letter , as the words are read from the ASCII file , just as before . 

  When the structure is built , it is saved ( in one chunk ) to a binary file . 

  This completes the pre-processing stage . 

  The second stage occurs when the system is started up . 

  Space for the tree structure array is allocated ( again in one contiguous amount ) , and the binary file is loaded into the array . 

  This second stage is very fast . 

  Look-up performance 

  Failure of look-up -- Wild cards 

  Once the tree structures had been implemented , it was found that some of the problems occurring from the recognition stage could very easily and neatly be solved from the nature of the tree . 

  For example if the recogniser can not produce any character at a letter position within a word , we can use the tree of the lexicon to suggest what this missing character , or " wild card " might be ( e. g. " c a * e " the * could be " f " , " k " , " r " or " s " etc . ) . 

  The path through the tree is followed as normal , i. e. through the " c " and " a " nodes , then followed down all routes from the " a " node to see if a path exists which ends in " e " , where the end of word flag is set . 

  This method can be used even if the first letter position is unknown , or if there is more than one letter unknown within a word , whatever the word length . 

  See also section 5.2.6 and section 5.3.3.3 for further discussion of this topic , with some possible implementations . 

  Another problem with the accuracy of the recogniser is the placing of word boundaries . 

  When working with unconnected script , the samples of writing studied often had unnaturally spaced characters and words . 

  Instead of simply : 

  using small spaces between letters and larger spaces between words which can easily be distinguished by the recogniser , the following was often found : 

  which obviously makes the contrast between letter and word spacing almost indistinguishable . 

  Where two or more words have been incorrectly joined together , it is possible to utilise the structure of the word tree to note where ends of words may occur . 

  For example , if there is no allowable string which spans the whole graph , then we can search in the same way as described above , but wherever the required path does not exist in the tree , check if that position in the tree is flagged for end-of-word . 

  If it is , then take the next character in the graph , and start searching again from the head of the tree . 

  The search continues to generate all allowable phrases ( sequences of words ) from the candidate letters in the graph . 

  However this can give large numbers of phrases , most of which are nonsense . 

  If word boundaries are inaccurate , this kind of approach may be the only way to find them , except perhaps using syntactic information as well . 

  Humans find it relatively easy to read sentences such as packmybagswithfivedozenextraliquorjugs and will generally use orthographic and syntactic information to do this , finding the word boundaries subconsciously . 

  It may be possible to improve searching by noting sequences of letters commonly signalling the ends or beginnings of words , and/ or by expectation of a new word by syntactic category . 

  However the longer the sequence incorrectly joined , the more candidate strings/ phrases are allowable . 

  The sample input data mybagswithfivedozen ( five words incorrectly joined together , with a number of alternative characters per letter position ) generated 347,133 phrases of allowable strings , so there is a trade-off between finding the correct sequence , time , and the number of phrases found . 

  Ordering the list of allowable strings 

  Some way of ordering the list of allowable strings ( or phrases ) was needed , so that the most likely can be displayed as output from the recognition and post-processing system , with the other candidates available to be displayed if necessary . 

  In this way , when the number of allowable strings or phrases is high , a few most likely can be stored -- it was found that if all allowable phrases with long sequences were stored , there was insufficient memory on the computer ! 

  In practice we have found the combination ( i. e. mean ) of ranks to give the best results , but tends to produce tied combined ranks frequently . 

  By " best " results here it is meant that the correct word occurs first or near the top of the ordered list of allowable strings . 

  If the combined ranks give an equal result , using the combined probabilities to order those allowable candidate strings with the same ranks gives good results ( see section 2.3 for details of ranks and probabilities ) . 

  Results 

  Two example passages were written by a small number of subjects , and the script analysed by the current recognition system . 

  The two passages are as follows : 

  Passage A ( six samples of handwriting ) 

  It has come to my attention that students have been copying software with staff encouragement . 

  Some students are now openly broadcasting this fact . 

  There are notices in departmental rooms regarding this matter and I would remind you that such activities as copying are illegal without a licence . 

  It would be wise to desist from this activity forthwith . 

  Passage B ( four samples of handwriting ) 

  Recently in the Department there has been an instance of a telephone order which has been brought to my attention by the County Council auditors . 

  All orders must be placed through the Departmental secretary with my prior authority . 

  Without this we are breaking our governing rules and it has been indicated that any future occurrence will make the person concerned liable to disciplinary action . 

  Thus the procedure must cease . 

  The results found by taking the first ten allowable strings in order of combined ranks and probabilities are shown in tables 3.7 and 3.8 below . 

  The most important result from these experiments is that if the first ten positions of the list of allowable candidate strings are considered , the correct words are present between 97 % and 100 % of the time , depending on the particular writing being analysed . 

  Conclusions 

  For effective implementation of a lexical look-up technique , an efficient data structure is needed for representation of the vocabulary . 

  Such a data structure should be the best compromise with regard to processing time and memory requirements . 

  From our first experiments with binary tree structures it became apparent that there were other structures available which would give much faster search times . 

  The speed of negative searches is particularly important because most searches in the recognition system are unsuccessful . 

  The 26-way tree structure gave very fast search times , but memory requirements were almost unmanageable especially if the process was to be attempted on a small personal computer . 

  Hence other methods were tried in order to reduce the memory overheads , and comparisons were made across a number of different methods . 

  Depending upon the particular system required , a balance must be found between the main variables of speed of searching and amount of memory used , especially for a larger vocabulary ( approximately 60,000 to 70,000 words ) . 

  The other major consideration is ease of expansion of the data structure if further information about the individual items of vocabulary is necessary . 

  The facility to add more words to the lexicon should also be considered , especially for proper nouns and technical terms . 

  This may require some kind of additional structure ( at least temporarily ) whilst the system is on-line , until the trie can be re-built with the new words at a later stage . 

  For our system the trie structure ( section 3.2.3.3 ) was most appropriate given the need for grammatical , morphological and semantic information in further stages of the script recognition process ( see chapter 4 for further details ) , however the reduced-memory tree ( section 3.3.1 ) also gives fast search times and reasonable memory requirements , especially for experimental purposes with different word lists and test data on a limited memory computer . 

  The directed acyclic word graph ( section 3.2.5 and section 3.3.3 ) is the optimal structure for saving memory , but no additional information can be stored for each word . 

  Such information is necessary for higher levels of analysis and will be discussed in chapter four . 

  In contrast the trie can store other information and is therefore more appropriate at this stage . 

  The dawg also takes much longer to construct , but would be ideal for a dedicated application on perhaps a PC where memory must be kept to a minimum and the structure would rarely need to be re-built . 

  Chapter Five 

  Combining Sources of Information 

  Introduction 

  The previous chapter discussed the integration and interface between the different levels of analysis of the handwriting recognition system . 

  This included details of the information needed by each level of analysis , and the additional information produced by that level . 

  Such information needs to be considered together when selecting the most likely word from all candidates , which implies that the information must be combined in some way . 

  So far it has been assumed that levels of processing within the system operate serially , from the pattern recognition , to the lexical look-up , then onto syntactic and semantic analysis . 

  In other words information is collected at the pattern recognition stage , and all further levels select from this . 

  This need not be the case , since each level has information of its own to contribute to the overall picture , as well as selecting from the existing information . 

  The current chapter will discuss ways in which all levels of analysis can suggest alternative or additional candidate letters , words ( or perhaps phrases ) in order to supplement information from the pattern level . 

  The discussion will include areas where the pattern recogniser could be improved , and will describe methods used to implement some of these ideas . 

  In particular these ideas will be applied to existing errors within the system . 

  This will necessarily involve some interaction between the different levels of analysis . 

  Psychological models of reading propose interaction of levels of information in the human language processing system . 

  In particular , Morton's " Logogen Theory " ( Morton , 1969 ) , Marslen-Wilson's " Cohort Theory " of word recognition ( Marslen-Wilson and Welsh , 1978 ) , and Rumelhart and McClelland's " Interactive Activation Model " ( McClelland and Rumelhart , 1981 ; Rumelhart and McClelland , 1982 ) are relevant here . 

  Psychological theories of word recognition 

  According to Logogen Theory , each word in the mental lexicon is assumed to have a " logogen " . 

  This is a theoretical entity that contains a specification of the word's defining characteristics . 

  Word recognition occurs when the activation of a single lexical entry ( i. e. a logogen ) crosses some critical threshold value . 

  Logogens accept input from both bottom-up sensory analysers , and top-down contextual mechanisms . 

  Both sensory and contextual information interact in such a way that there is a trade-off between them ; the more contextual information input to a logogen from its top-down sources , the less sensory information is needed to bring the logogen above threshold for activation . 

  Cohort Theory views word recognition ( for speech input ) as a bottom-up process of eliminating possible candidates by de-activation . 

  This is in contrast with its predecessor ( Logogen Theory ) which assumes activation of only a single lexical item . 

  According to Marslen-Wilson and Welsh , a set of potential word candidates ( the " cohort " ) is activated during the earliest phases of the word recognition process solely on the basis of bottom-up sensory information . 

  That is , all words sharing the same initial sound characteristics become activated in the system . 

  As the system detects mismatches between initial bottom-up sensory information and the top-down information about the expected sound representation of words generated by context , inappropriate candidates within the initial cohort are de-activated . 

  A word is said to be recognised at the point when a particular word can be uniquely distinguished from all other words in the cohort . 

  As in Logogen Theory , word recognition and the subsequent lexical access are viewed as a result of a balance between the available sensory and contextual information about a word at any given time . 

  In particular , when de-activation occurs on the basis of contextual mismatches , less sensory information is therefore needed for a single word candidate to emerge . 

  In Rumelhart and McClelland's Interactive Activation Model , perception results from excitatory and inhibitory interactions of detectors for visual features , letters , and words . 

  The central feature of this model is that the processing of information in reading is assumed to consist of a series of levels . 

  Each level is concerned with forming a representation of the input at a different level of abstraction . 

  Information flows in both directions at once -- from lower to higher levels and from higher to lower levels . 

  A visual input excites detectors for visual features in the display . 

  These excite detectors for letters consistent with the active features . 

  The letter detectors in turn excite detectors for consistent words . 

  Active word detectors mutually inhibit each other and send feedback to the letter level , strengthening activation and hence perceptibility of their constituent letters . 

  Context also aids perception . 

  Hence perception is fundamentally an interactive process . 

  So top-down ( or " conceptually driven " ) processing works simultaneously and in conjunction with bottom-up ( or " data driven " ) processing . 

  The current script recognition system processes information in a similar fashion to that of Rumelhart and McClelland's model . 

  The pattern recognition stage takes input of a visual kind and extracts features , which are passed on to letter and word levels of processing . 

  However there is no feedback in our system at present . 

  A study of the above model suggests strongly that such a feedback mechanism would facilitate recognition , if some suitable implementation could be devised . 

  Taking this further , interaction with higher contextual knowledge is also possible . 

  Higher levels of syntactic and semantic processing can provide their own information to add to existing word level information . 

  This information may confirm existing candidates ( excitatory connections ) , or may conflict with existing candidates ( inhibitory connections ) . 

  Our word information would have to be stored in some appropriate fashion to facilitate " activation " of certain words from both directions , i. e. from both the contextual and the feature/ letter levels . 

  Examples of the use of higher level knowledge 

  As we have seen so far , the results from pattern recognition are far from perfect , and no matter what improvements are made to recognition , it is never going to reach 100 % accuracy . 

  People can write words so that they look like other words , or do not look like any word at all , so the correct word can only be found from the surrounding words in context . 

  For example : 

  1 . 

  " The slope was very sleep " ( uncrossed t ) 

  2 . 

  " I put the clog on a lead " ( badly written d ) 

  3 . 

  " All the people arc boring " ( badly written e ) 

  4 . 

  " I put my boots down on the table " ( meant books ) 

  In example 1 above , the t of steep has been left uncrossed , making the word look like sleep instead , and in example 2 the word dog looks like clog . 

  Even a reliable pattern recogniser could only find a word which best fits the script as it appears , having no knowledge to suggest that that word is incorrect . 

  A good system needs to be able to detect when errors occur , and hopefully also be able to employ some means of correcting them , or at least attempting to correct them . 

  Higher levels of analysis can provide extra knowledge , both to aid detection of errors , and to make alternative suggestions for possible correction of a detected error . 

  However , using information from more levels of analysis means finding some suitable way of combining that information . 

  Example 1 above should be detected as an error by analysis of the grammatical categories of the words . 

  Syntax suggests that an adjective should follow the word very , but sleep is either a noun or a verb . 

  The sequence very steep is ( syntactically ) 1,500 times more likely to occur than very sleep ( from transition frequency counts of the LOB corpus ) . 

  Similarly for example 3 , the words people and arc are less likely to occur together than people and are . 

  However for examples 2 and 4 , syntactic analysis would not identify any problems , because they are grammatically acceptable . 

  Example 2 does not really make sense ( although it is possible to think of situations where this might occur ) , but example 4 does . 

  Semantic analysis of these examples might be able to identify a problem with 2 , but example 4 would probably pass through all processing and be accepted . 

  There is no way of knowing that the writer intended to write the word books , but by a lexical substitution error wrote boots instead . 

  Given the current recognition system , it is most unlikely that such examples will occur in this form . 

  As we have seen in previous chapters , it is infrequent that allowable candidate words are unique . 

  From a sample of 106 words , approximately 13 % were unique ( 12 % gave no allowable words , 27 % had between 2 and 5 allowable candidate words , 33 % between 6 and 20 candidates , and 15 % more than 20 candidates ) . 

  Consequently there will be other candidate words at most word positions , and all combinations of words must be considered . 

  Given a choice between sleep and steep for example 1 , both syntax and semantics would choose steep . 

  Similarly for example 3 , syntax would choose are over arc , and for example 2 , semantics would choose dog rather than clog . 

  Example 4 still remains a problem , but it may be that books could be suggested as more likely than boots from semantic co-occurrence information , or from frequency of use from a corpus ( books is five times more likely to occur than boots ) , especially if weighted from a count of occurrence in the script recognised so far . 

  However these choices will only occur if the correct words are contained in the list of alternative candidate words , which may not be the case . 

  It must also be noted that preceding word positions may have been recognised incorrectly , given that most positions have alternative candidates , and often the correct word is not first in the ordered list . 

  This means that the situation is more ambiguous than as just described . 

  Whether the alternative candidates confuse the situation more often than they aid it can only be found from adequate testing of the system . 

  Table 5.1 shows sample recognition results for examples 1 to 4 discussed above . 

  The intended words for examples 1 and 4 ( steep and books , respectively ) did not occur as alternatives . 

  In example 2 the intended word dog was the second candidate word , and in example 3 the intended word are was the top candidate , actually rated higher than the " correct " word arc . 

  The intended words might be able to be suggested for examples 1 and 4 if a method of whole word recognition were employed , because sleep and steep , boots and books have the same overall shape . 

  Traditional spelling error detection and correction data is for typed input . 

  For handwriting there are problems not only of spelling errors , but also illegible words . 

  For recognition , a third problem is idiosyncrasies of the recogniser . 

  Errors in the current script recognition system must be studied in detail in order to establish whether they can always be identified . 

  If they can , then effective error correction methods can be considered . 

  These may be standard algorithms , or alternative techniques may be suggested by the specific types of error produced in the system . 

  For example there may be further information available at the pattern level , or provided by higher levels of analysis , which will be able to suggest alternative candidate words for the position in error . 

  If an effective method can be found , then it may be possible to utilise the same information to aid the choice of candidate words in positions where no error has been found . 

  In summary , the areas to be addressed in this chapter are : 

  the identification , or detection of errors in the system ; 

  the correction of errors if any have been detected ; 

  finding additional information which can aid both of the above ; 

  combining this information in some meaningful way . 

  Errors 

  Introduction 

  Given the lexical look-up of the script recognition system , as described in earlier chapters , there are cases where the system will not be able to suggest any allowable candidate string . 

  There will also be cases when a stray candidate from the lexical look-up is rejected by the later stages of analysis . 

  There are various possible reasons for these failures , including errors of recognition and errors of spelling . 

  Such errors could also produce an incorrect but acceptable candidate . 

  This could only be detected and corrected by the user . 

  The system can only attempt to deal with possible errors of recognition or spelling . 

  Mis-recognitions and errors of spelling are impossible to distinguish from each other , given the nature of the data output from the pattern recogniser , however they should be detected and corrected if possible . 

  The following sections discuss accepted literature methods of error detection and correction . 

  Traditional methods for detecting errors 

  Humans , when reading , often miss spelling errors , because their expectations of what the text should say , influence the visual system , so that they read the intended word , rather than what is actually in front of them . 

  This is especially so for handwriting , when not only spelling errors , but also illegible words can be deduced from the context . 

  With the increase in word and text processing computer systems , programs which check and correct spelling have become more and more common ( see Peterson , 1980 for a review ) . 

  A standard method of spelling error detection ( also known as checking or verifying ) is a deterministic approach by look-up in a table or word list ( Bledsoe and Browning , 1959 ; Shinghal and Toussaint , 1979 ; Srihari , Hull and Choudhari , 1983 ; Bozinovic and Srihari , 1982 ; Berghel , 1987 ) . 

  If the word is not found then it is said to be misspelled , so either correction is attempted , or it is returned to the user for verification . 

  Alternative techniques are probabilistic , using constituent analysis ( n-grams or string segments ) , which are faster than lexicon search routines , but less precise . 

  For example the unix facility TYPO checks sequences of di-grams and tri-grams and computes an index of peculiarity for each word -- if a word contains several very rare di- or tri-grams , it is potentially misspelled ( Morris and Cherry , 1975 ) . 

  Many other systems ( Riseman and Hanson , 1974 ; Ullman , 1977 ; Hull and Srihari , 1982 ) use similar methods with grams , but it should be noted that the majority of these are designed to check the spelling of typed input . 

  Any studies of handwritten spelling errors ( e. g. Ellis , 1979 ; Wing and Baddeley , 1979 ; Mitton , 1987 ) were manually checked . 

  There are also hybrid techniques which use some of both look-up and constituent analysis . 

  These include affix stripping routines . 

  Constituent analysis is used to identify and remove legitimate affixes from word tokens , and a table look-up procedure is employed to determine whether or not the root of the word is correctly spelled . 

  Given an input file of text , the task of a spelling checker is to identify those words which are incorrect , but first it must perform some document normalisation . 

  This includes the standardisation of words with regard to case ( so " DOG " matches " dog " ) or to alternative spelling ( so " judgment " matches with " judgement " ) , the removal of any formatting symbols , and sensible handling of digits , apostrophes , hyphens and punctuation symbols . 

  For example hyphens functioning as delimiters are essential , whereas those signifying word breaks at the ends of lines are extraneous , and the two parts of the word should possibly be joined together . 

  A good spell checker has to minimise errors both of type 1 ( a correct word is marked as incorrectly spelled ) , and of type 2 ( an incorrectly spelled word is not marked ) . 

  A checker that detects errors simply by lexical look-up will obviously fail to spot " real world " errors , such as wether for whether , i. e. where a misspelling has transformed one English word into another . 

  The problem becomes worse as the dictionary gets larger . 

  A checker that did not have wether in its lexicon would flag wether as an error ( correctly or not ) , but one with a comprehensive dictionary would fail to do so . 

  Interestingly , it appears that if a word is misspelled , any errors will usually be later in the word , the first letter is usually correct ( Mitton , 1987 ) . 

  The few first letter errors which do occur are in words with silent consonants , for example know and write . 

  Errors are often phonetically based , so f may be written for ph and so on . 

  Another study of typing errors showed that lower frequency letters are more likely to be replaced by higher frequency letters ( Grudin , 1983 ) . 

  Classification of spelling errors 

  Damerau ( 1964 ; see also Peterson , 1980 ; Ullman , 1977 ) states that 80 % of errors are the result of the following four types of error ( for typescript ) . 

  Presumably the remaining 20 % are formed from combinations of these four classifications : 

  1 ) 

  transposition of two letters ; 

  2 ) 

  one extra letter , or insertion ; 

  3 ) 

  one missing letter , or omission ; 

  4 ) 

  one wrong letter , or substitution . 

  The following table shows some examples of these errors . 

  Resulting error type A means that the intended word is transformed into another English word ( a " real world " error , whereas type B is where it has been transformed into a non-English string . 

  Salmina and Khodashinskii ( 1986 ) give the same four classes of errors ( their examples being from Russian typescript ) and include approximate percentages of occurrence of the four types : 

  1 ) 

  transpositions 10 - 15 % 

  2 ) 

  insertions 25 - 35 % 

  3 ) 

  omissions 30 - 40 % 

  4 ) 

  substitutions 15 - 20 % 

  These are the most frequently occurring errors , and infrequent errors such as combinations of the above , account for approximately 4 - 9 % of the total . 

  Wing and Baddeley ( 1979 ) used the same four classifications for handwritten errors : 

  1 ) 

  transpositions 3 % 

  2 ) 

  insertions 13 % 

  3 ) 

  omissions 49 % 

  4 ) 

  substitutions 36 % 

  Methods for error correction 

  As we have seen , generally some kind of n-gram or lexical check is used for error detection . 

  Spelling correction algorithms usually suggest a few alternative words which are in some sense similar to the detected misspelled word . 

  A mathematical function grades how different these suggestions are from the misspelling , and the nearest few are suggested . 

  Given Damerau's four main error types , it is possible to approach these situations in order to find potential correct words . 

  For each type of error , an algorithm can be found which will attempt to find the intended word . 

  For a string of length m characters , there will be an additional 4m searches of the lexicon . 

  Peterson ( 1980 ) explains that most misspellings can be generated from their correct counterparts by using these four rules , and in fact form the basis of the DEC-10 spelling corrector . 

  The resulting strings produced by applying the rules are searched for in the lexicon in the normal way . 

  Thus a candidate list of possible words is formed by multiple searches of the lexicon . 

  The search techniques can be improved , for example by using a lexicon which is indexed by length . 

  For each of the additional searches of the lexicon , the length of the required string is always known , so searching the whole lexicon is wasteful . 

  However this also depends on the chosen memory structure for the lexicon . 

  These tend to be standard methods such as hashing ( section 5.4.3 ) , trees or tries ( see chapter 3 ) . 

  Peterson ( 1980 ) comments that spelling correction is not cheap , but then neither is it prohibitively expensive , and it is not normally needed . 

  It is only employed for the word tokens from the input text which have not been found in the lexicon . 

  Common literature methods ( Tappert , 1982 ; Hall and Dowling , 1980 ; Berghel , 1987 ) have used string matching techniques , ( e. g. nearest match methods , approximate string matching ) to find candidates for intended words once an error has been identified . 

  However most of these assume that misspelled words have been identified , and concentrate on methods of comparison of the word in error to a number of candidates . 

  Factors such as the number of letters different , and word length are often involved . 

  The algorithms suggest one candidate to be more likely than the others . 

  Spelling correcting programs can be interactive . 

  When a misspelling is identified , it is highlighted , and a number of options are available to the user . 

  The program can suggest a list of alternative words and allow the user to choose a substitute , the user can edit the file to correct the word , or the user can confirm that this is in fact a correctly spelled word , and should be added to the program's dictionary . 

  Thus correction involves substituting the correct spelling of the intended word for its misspelled counterpart , but controlled by the user . 

  It would be undesirable for this process to be fully automated . 

  A spelling corrector must of necessity use a lexicon . 

  Typically several lexical lists are used , especially when primary storage is at a premium . 

  The lists are arranged in a hierarchy ( Peterson , 1980 ) , for example there may be a small , static lexicon of very common words ( perhaps 100-200 ) , and a dynamic small to moderately sized document specific lexicon ( perhaps 1000-2000 ) . 

  In secondary storage there will be a large , static lexicon of anything between 10,000 to 100,000 words . 

  Having found a set of words from the lexicon which may be the correct spelling of an identified misspelling , common correction techniques compute an index of matching for each candidate word . 

  This can be thought of as a probability measure that the word token in question resulted from a misspelling of a dictionary word . 

  Berghel ( 1987 ) distinguishes between three types of orthographic similarity . 

  They are firstly , positional similarity , a relation referring to the degree to which matching characters in two strings are in the same position . 

  Secondly , ordinal similarity , a relation referring to the degree in which characters in two strings occur in the same order . 

  Thirdly , material similarity , a relation referring to the degree to which two strings consist of the same characters . 

  These three classes fit neatly with Damerau's four types of errors . 

  Substitution errors are positional , transpositions are material , and both insertions and omissions are ordinal . 

  Berghel goes on to explain that positional similarity is too narrow for spelling correction , whereas material similarity is too broad . 

  Ordinal similarity is the one that many algorithms have employed , for example Soundex ( Odell and Russell , 1918 and 1922 ) . 

  Additional information can often be used to increase correction accuracy and speed , for example by studying the sources of errors . 

  For typed input this can mean knowing the layout of the keyboard , because keys close to each other are more likely to have been substituted , inserted or transposed . 

  For true spelling errors ( rather than typographical mistakes ) , a corrector which knows something about pronunciation will do better than one without , because a writer who is unsure of a spelling will probably attempt to spell a word as it sounds ( Mitton , 1987 ) . 

  The following sections analyse the types of errors found from test data from the script recognition system , and discuss the feasibility and effectiveness of applying standard spelling correction techniques . 

  Analysis of errors from a recognition system 

  The following table of classifications of errors from test recognition data shows that it is impossible to tell what type the original error was . 

  A word can be misspelled , mis-recognised or mis-written , but all three cases appear the same when looking at the pattern recogniser output . 

  These examples are from ten samples of two test passages ( 6 samples of 57 words , and 4 samples of 79 words , i. e. a total of 658 words ) . 

  36 words were incorrectly recognised . 

  The strings in the recogniser output column are the calculated top ranked candidate string for each word . 

  No words were found to be allowable in these positions , so instead the top-ranked string is stored . 

  Of these 36 errors , all but one were detected because the initial lexical look-up found no other candidate string to be allowable at each of these word positions . 

  The one case where another string was allowable is where the intended word are was recognised as ore . 

  However because ore is a noun and are is a verb , this error would most likely be spotted by the syntactic analysis , because ore would not fit into the same word position as are in the sentence . 

  It can be seen from the table above that the most frequently occurring errors are of the substitution type . 

  Of the 36 errors , there were 13 occurrences of the substitution error , which is a third of the total . 

  There are also two errors of insertion of an extra letter , and one of omission of a letter . 

  This gives a total of 16 out of 36 which could be solved using standard error correction algorithms . 

  Including the four cases of an unknown character , this gives 20 out of 36 cases which could be solved . 

  The remaining 16 occurrences are mostly combinations of at least two of the described problems . 

  It is also interesting to note that for 33 out of the 36 errors , the top rated candidate strings have the same overall word shape as the intended words ( see section 5.3.3.2 for further discussion of word shape ) . 

  It should be noted here that the recognition output such as " \ " and " - " are strokes of the pen which the recogniser has been unable to join to any other stroke to give a possible letter . 

  In fact they are produced by ligatures which were missed during pattern recognition when ligatures are removed from the sequences of Freeman vectors . 

  The character " ? " is the recogniser's unknown character , a stroke which does not match with any vector encoding in the database . 

  Unmatched characters 

  The character " ? " , or " wild card " character ( mentioned previously in section 3.4.1 ) is sometimes given as output from the pattern recogniser for letter positions where the recognition could not match with any known character encoding . 

  A fairly simple algorithm has been implemented to search for possible alternatives for these letter positions , given the surrounding candidate letters ( as detailed in section 3.4.1 ) . 

  The initial results from this implementation show it to be effective in many cases , but rather counter-productive in others . 

  In the example passages of test data discussed in the previous section , four out of the 36 words in error contained an unknown character . 

  Three of these four cases can be solved by the implemented algorithm , as shown in the following table . 

  It was found that by removing a backslash " \ " from a candidate string after the letters r , v and w gave an allowable word . 

  This changes two of the above 36 errors . 

  One of these ( software , recognised as " soltw\are " ) would now become a simple substitution error , and the other ( remind , recognised as " r\emi ? d " ) would become a simple unknown character problem , with only one word in the lexicon which matches the pattern . 

  This means that all four cases can now be solved . 

  A remaining problem with substitutions for unknown characters is that the resulting candidates can not be ordered by likelihood of being correct , because the word could equally well be any of them . 

  For example for " ha ? " , if had , hag , ham , has , hat , haw and hay were found to be candidates , it would be left to further stages of analysis of the system to determine which of these is more likely to be the intended word , although they can be suggested in order of their frequency of use calculated from a corpus of English text . 

  Detection and types of errors in our system 

  Looking at an example from recognition test data , an original handwritten word was students , but was recognised as sludents . 

  It is possible to imagine that the person writing it did not cross the t , which is a common occurrence in handwriting . 

  Should that be classified as a misspelling , or was it just " wrongly " written ? 

  There is certainly a theoretical distinction , but from the practical view of attempting correction , there probably is not . 

  As far as the script recognition system is concerned , the cases which suggest that a word is an error , are where the lexical look-up gives no allowable candidate strings , or all candidate strings are rejected by further stages of analysis . 

  Thus for detection of errors , there are two situations : 

  1 ) 

  no allowable candidate strings ; 

  2 ) 

  candidates rejected by higher levels of analysis ( syntax and semantics ) . 

  The reasons for these two situations arising could be because the correct word is not in the word list , but this in fact accounts for very few cases . 

  Or it may be because the recogniser has for whatever reason , not suggested the correct letters . 

  This could be because the word was misspelled in the original script ( user dependent error ) , or due to mis-recognition of at least one character ( recogniser dependent error ) . 

  Thus there are three reasons for errors occurring : 

  1 ) 

  misspelling 

  2 ) 

  mis-recognition 

  3 ) 

  correct word is not in the lexicon 

  There is a theoretical distinction between ( 1 ) a misspelling and ( 2 ) a mis-recognition , but the results from recognition will not enable us to distinguish between them , and indeed they can be treated similarly for attempted correction . 

  It is feasible that there will be situations where words that are misspelled or mis-recognised are actually transformed by the error into other words , ( i. e. resulting in error type A -- section 5.2.3 ) which could fit into the sentence . 

  It is uncertain how likely this is to occur , but the possibility seems remote . 

  Of the 36 errors discussed above , only one gave a " real world " error . 

  In such cases the system will be unable to spot any error as they will pass successfully through all stages of analysis . 

  These could only be corrected by the user . 

  It is also not clear whether there is a direct relationship between the two cases where errors can be detected , and the three reasons for errors . 

  This is another interesting theoretical point , but probably of little consequence as far as error correction is concerned . 

  Application of traditional methods to the recognition system 

  It is not certain whether it would be worthwhile to apply common methods of coping with misspellings to our recognition system . 

  Initial experiments have suggested that most traditional methods would not be immediately applicable , because of the nature of the original data from the pattern recogniser . 

  However by applying combinations of other algorithms , it may be possible to take some relatively simple steps towards improving existing recognition rates by some kind of error correction system . 

  For example the letters l and t are often confused with each other , so t could be substituted for all occurrences of l , and l could be substituted for all occurrences of t . 

  If the algorithms for correction of the above four types of spelling errors were to be applied to our system , it is unlikely that applying them to the highest-rated allowable string ( if there are any allowable strings ) is going to find the intended word . 

  However it is not clear whether they should be applied to the complete list of allowable words , or to the list of candidate strings , or indeed to some subset of either . 

  The major problem in this situation is the number of candidates involved . 

  If correction techniques are employed upon the list of allowable strings , the intended word may still not be found because it is sufficiently different from the entries in the existing list of allowable strings . 

  In many cases this list already numbers over 100 , so correction techniques applied to such a long list would probably take too long to be worthwhile implementing , and the results from such techniques would produce many more candidates which would all have to be processed through the remaining stages of the recognition system . 

  Alternatively these techniques could be applied to every one of the candidate strings for each word position identified as a potential error ( again it should be noted that this assumes that errors can be identified , which may be doubtful for our system ) . 

  However we have already seen ( see Appendix B ) that the total number of candidate strings can number in the thousands , so any correction techniques applied to these would reach explosive proportions in terms of time taken and number of additional candidates produced . 

  Some experiments must be tried on words of varying length to establish how explosive the problem really is . 

  To apply such techniques to a relatively small subset of candidate strings is a preferable solution , but some grounds for deciding on a subset would have to be established . 

  This could be done by using the ranks of the candidate letters to direct correction . 

  Using the ranking ( or confidence ) information for the list of candidate strings , we can reduce the problem somewhat , by trying the standard four error correction approaches on just the top 10 candidate strings . 

  It may also be feasible to look at individual letter confidences to determine an ordering of letter positions in which to apply the substitution algorithm . 

  Whether this would help to solve the problem is uncertain , and some initial experiments would have to be undertaken to establish its effectiveness . 

  Just because the recogniser has little confidence in a particular character need bear no resemblance to whether or not that is the incorrect character in a misspelled word . 

  However it may help with badly written ( and therefore mis-recognised ) words . 

  Given the problems explained above , it may be difficult , and in some cases counter-productive to attempt any correction of errors within our system , however initial investigations suggest there may be particular situations where correction can be attempted and is in fact useful to improve recognition rates . 

  Looking at the remaining 16 error cases from our system ( see table 5.4 ) in more detail , it is clear that some of these can in fact be solved by applying some simple substitutions where the recognition has failed . 

  For example will was recognised as " vvill " ( top candidate ) , so substituting w for " vv " would provide the correct result . 

  Similarly departmental was recognised as " deparl-mental " , so looking for sequences such as " l- " and substituting t would give the correct result ( also y for " vj " , a for " c\ " , and there may well be others ) . 

  In fact simple substitutions of characters such as l , i , t , f , and " \ " for each other is an effective first attempt to find correct words , because these characters frequently confuse with each other . 

  Furthermore , if the characters " \ " and " - " are ignored completely , another four examples could be solved ( i. e. forthw-ith , cou\nty , \are , w-ould ) . 

  This gives a grand total of 30 out of 36 errors which could be corrected , by using simple algorithms as a first attempt before going into more complicated algorithms which may be impractical . 

  Such impracticality could perhaps be measured as a function of word length . 

  If the word is short ( i. e. less than some lower bound ) then attempt some correction . 

  If the word is too long ( i. e. longer than some upper bound ) then do not attempt correction , in which case the word might be sent back to the user to be re-written . 

  The important point to note as a summary here , is that the algorithms suggested for solving 30 out of 36 errors , would find the correct ( i. e. intended ) word by looking only at the top ranked candidate string , which neatly solves the problem described earlier of what to choose as a starting point for possible error correction , and avoids the potentially explosive situations . 

  Alternative methods for correction of errors 

  As explained above , attempting correction on all candidate strings would reach explosive proportions in most cases , but correction techniques can be directed , in order to reduce the number of strings on which the algorithms are tried . 

  A completely different approach for solving user dependent errors ( misspellings ) involves inserting common misspellings into the tree of the lexicon ( Peterson , 1980 ) . 

  Such entries would have to be flagged in the tree structure to show that they are misspellings to distinguish them from correct words ( as mentioned previously in section 4.4.3 during the discussion of the flagging system and the 12 codes necessary to represent proper nouns , compounds and phrases ) . 

  Thus greatfully would be flagged as a misspelling of gratefully and prehaps as a misspelling of perhaps . 

  A misspelled word included in the tree would have the index of its corresponding correct word . 

  For example recieve would have the same index as receive and so on . 

  As Peterson ( 1980 ) explains , " this approach has not been included in any current spellers , probably because of the lack of an obvious source of known misspellings and the low frequency of even common misspellings " . 

  Any list of common misspellings would most likely have to be collected by hand . 

  Some could perhaps be collected from the input to currently available spelling checkers , as long as the words are verified as worthwhile including as common misspellings . 

  How much this would increase the size of the tree structure and the speed of look-up , is not clear because it depends upon the number of words stored . 

  For example , the following misspellings of accommodation may occur : accomodation , acommodation , acomodation , accomadation , acommadation and acomadation . 

  This makes six extra words , at least , but they are not equally as common . 

  Some criteria for deciding what to include and what not to include would have to be established . 

  It is also very difficult to say how successful this would be within the current recognition system . 

  Conclusions 

  The above discussions have noted that in general , error detection and correction are difficult techniques to implement , especially given the ambiguous nature of script recognition data . 

  However , by studying individual errors , it has been demonstrated that in fact simple algorithms can be implemented which significantly improve recognition rates . 

  For example from the sample data of 658 words , there were 36 errors ( i. e. recognition rate following lexical look-up of 94.5 % , taking up to ten allowable strings per word position ) . 

  If 30 of the 36 errors can be corrected , this gives a recognition rate of 99 % . 

  Without knowledge of the particular type of error , any attempted correction is bound to give the incorrect solution in some cases , but more detailed investigation is necessary to establish whether this proportion is significant . 

  Heuristics are obviously needed , and in fact looking at the types of errors actually found in recognition data , some suggested ones would appear to be quite successful . 

  Algorithms such as reversing sequences of ie to ei following a letter c are effective first attempts before going on to more complicated techniques , or even instead of such techniques which may turn out to be counter-productive in terms of time taken and the number of candidates produced . 

  The errors from the recognition system can usually be detected , and are often solved by simple methods of correction due to prior knowledge of the types of recognition errors found . 

  More traditional error correcting techniques can be used as a last resort , and if they are applied to just the top-rated candidate string this should avoid the potentially explosive problem . 

  A combination of inserting common spelling errors into the tree structure of the lexicon , and using heuristic methods , should be particularly effective . 

  Interaction between levels of analysis 

  Introduction 

  The preceding section discussed traditional error detection and correction methods , mostly applied to typographical spelling errors . 

  It is uncertain whether they are directly applicable to our system , where the majority of errors are specific to the pattern recogniser . 

  Only a few of the errors are of the same kind as spelling or typing errors . 

  With knowledge of the particular error , it is possible to implement some correction algorithms . 

  However this knowledge is not available in our recognition system . 

  The indication of a possible error is if the lexical look-up produces no allowable candidate strings , or if all candidates at a word position are rejected by further stages of analysis . 

  Thus we can detect at least some of the errors -- others may slip through un-detected if one of the candidate words ( although incorrect ) fits into the sentence . 

  The following discussion investigates improvements which could be made to augment the pattern recognition information . 

  Taken together with higher level knowledge , these could provide us with an alternative technique for correcting errors within the system . 

  It may also be possible to use higher level knowledge to contribute additional information rather than merely selecting from existing candidates . 

  Currently , the recogniser does not fully exploit information about the physical properties of the input . 

  That is , it does not directly make use of information about the length of words , or information about the overall word shape . 

  The recogniser codes the input as letter strokes which are then combined to produce possible characters . 

  Physical size and position of strokes are not incorporated into the coding scheme . 

  Thus information about the presence or absence of ascenders and descenders is only implicit and not directly derivable from the coded version of the input . 

  Information about shape and size will of course be to some extent writer dependent . 

  However , parameters for them for individual writers could be extracted from an initial training phase for a script recognition system . 

  Additionally , length and shape need not be dependent upon absolute physical size but could be coded in a way that represented information about them relative to any individual input letter string . 

  For example , the approximate number of characters per string could be used in later stages of processing , and information about the extension of characters relative to a middle zone could be calculated . 

  Knowing word length and word shape is effective in reducing the number of possible words ( Sinha , 1990 ) ; we need to know how useful information about them is when it is only approximate and uncertain . 

  Such information would be useful in a number of instances . 

  Firstly , when the letter strings have been looked-up in the word-list , a number of word candidates remain . 

  If it were the case that some of the remaining words were radically different from the approximate values for shape and length they could be removed from the list of candidates . 

  Secondly , there are a number of different types of situation where there is missing information : either the recogniser produces no candidates for a letter string , or it produces some candidates . 

  Where nothing is forthcoming for a word position , shape and length could be used along with higher level information to select potential words ; where some characters are suggested these could be used in addition to this information ; if only one or two letter positions in a word have no candidates , shape information could be used to select letter candidates , along with the restrictions provided by the adjacent letters . 

  Finally , it may be the case that a number of word candidates are produced , but they appear to be incorrect . 

  Again , knowledge about physical properties and higher level attributes could be used to select alternative words . 

  The syntax analyser currently operates using statistical information about the combination of sequences of grammatical categories . 

  Thus for any word position it can produce predictions about the expected grammatical category for that position . 

  Such information could be usefully combined with lower level information to help improve performance . 

  The following sections investigate the utility of these different sources of information , given that they will of necessity be uncertain . 

  If they do appear to be effective for recognition , this will have consequences for the design of pattern recognisers . 

  Initial investigations 

  From the above discussion , two cases where improvement is needed have been identified : 

  Case 1 -- to reduce the list of candidate words ; 

  Case 2 -- to suggest some candidates where none was found from the original data . 

  For Case 2 , there are actually two sub-cases , although they can be treated similarly : 

  Case 2a -- where no candidate words are found from the word look-up at all ; 

  Case 2b -- where none of the candidate words seem to fit with the syntactic processing of the sentence . 

  From initial investigations , it appeared that some measure of the number of letters in a word , and the word shape , would be quite restrictive for the list of possible candidates ( for Case 1 ) , as discussed below . 

  Case 1 -- Reducing the list of candidate words 

  Word length 

  The initial investigations involved analysing samples of handwriting and calculating the effectiveness of the word length and shape information , assuming that such information were available . 

  Table 5.6 shows a sample passage of handwritten text together with the recognition results for it , and the reductions in the number of candidates which would have been allowed , had a measure of word length been used . 

  This data is for a trained writer ( ie . the Freeman vector database contains details of the writer's handwriting ) , and as can be seen , the number of candidate words can be high , and in such cases the spread of lengths of the candidates is quite wide . 

  It would be desirable to be able to discard those candidates which are too short or too long to be the correct word -- this would reduce the number of candidate words to be considered for further processing . 

  To achieve this aim a measure of approximate number of letters in a word is needed . 

  As a first attempt we have tried to calculate this from the mean letter width for a particular writer , which can be obtained from the raw x-coordinate data for the script at training time . 

  The mean letter width value is obtained by summing the x differences ( x max - x min ) for each word in the training set , and dividing by the number of letters written . 

  During look-up , the number of letters in a word of script is calculated by the x difference of the word divided by the mean letter width figure . 

  Allowing for the actual word being within 1 of this figure , we have a measure of approximate word length . 

  The following table shows experimental results summed for four writers using this calculated mean letter width figure , allowing only those candidate words which are within 1 of the calculated word length . 

  The number of candidate words being discarded as too short or too long is quite small , and in fact the number of correct candidates being incorrectly discarded is slightly discouraging . 

  The effectiveness of a measure of word length is very writer dependent , and alternative methods of calculating this figure more accurately and consistently need to be evaluated . 

  Word shape 

  It has been shown that overall word shape by some coding of ascending and descending letters relative to a mid zone ( upper , middle and lower zone ) is restrictive across a lexicon ( Sinha , 1990 ) . 

  See also Appendix E for lexicon frequency counts of word shape . 

  Each letter of the alphabet is given a code ( " m " , " u " or " l " -- corresponding to 1 , 2 , 3 after Sinha ) , so a word gets a complete code string . 

  This code string can also be reduced , so only the changes are noted , sequences of the same code are reduced to a single code . 

  The coding of letters into the three categories should be a little flexible for letters such as f , i , and z which can be written in different ways , so a coding of " a " was included to represent any zone . 

  The following table shows some example words with their corresponding zone codes and reduced zone codes . 

  As can be seen , words such as dog , frog and happy , have different zone codes , but these all reduce to the same reduced zone code . 

  If shape information were available accurately from the pattern recogniser it should enable more candidate words to be discarded due to incorrect shape . 

  For example if we know that a section of script has an ascender close to the beginning of a word , and there are candidate words without one , then we can reject those candidates . 

  Initial experiments showed that shape information is potentially very useful for reducing the number of candidate words ( see Table 5.9 ) . 

  The above table shows the reduction is very effective if candidates can be rejected by exact zonal coding of the letters ( eg . candidates will and hill would be kept for code " muuu " , but roll and wool would be rejected ) . 

  However this by definition means only accepting candidates exactly the same length , which we have already established is most likely not going to be possible , so allowing candidates with the same reduced zonal coding is more realistic ( eg . for code " muuu " all candidates will , rill , roll , wool , awl , oval and oral would be kept ) . 

  However this still gives considerable reduction , much better than that already seen above for word length , but taken together with some approximate word length measure would be even more effective . 

  This is of course with the proviso that these measures can be calculated accurately . 

  Methods for achieving these measurements accurately require further investigation . 

  At present , the recogniser gives an indication of zone ( " u " , " m " or " l " ) for each candidate letter , ( which may in fact not match the usual zone for that letter ) . 

  No checking is done for this , because the letter was suggested as possible purely through its Freeman-encoded match with an encoding in the database . 

  However this existing code can actually be made use of , as discussed below . 

  Wild Cards 

  Sometimes the recogniser gives no candidate letter when nothing matches in the Freeman vector database ( section 3.4.1 and section 5.2.6 ) , and in such situations a " wild card " algorithm is implemented to attempt to fill such blank letter positions ( shown as * below ) by searching in the word look-up tree . 

  eg . ca*e *ope dea* p**t 

  This can be done for any letter position , including the first and the last letters of a word , and for more than one letter position , although it is not a good policy to allow more than two per word if the accuracy of the recogniser is to be relied on at all . 

  Searches in the lexicon may give : 

  However as with other characters , the recogniser gives a zone code for a wild card position as well . 

  It also tells us whether the unknown letter is a single segment letter , or made up from a combination of two segments . 

  Taking these two pieces of information together , we can categorise all 26 letters : 

  So instead of trying all 26 letters at a wild card position , we only need to try the letters in one of these 6 subsets . 

  This cuts down both the necessary search and the number of candidates found to be allowable . 

  Again the usefulness of the zonal information tends to very writer dependent , as some writers are very " mid zone " . 

  Making full use of the shape information may also mean coding the lexicon by shape for ease of search . 

  As an experiment , using the currently available zone codes from the recogniser , if the recogniser's zone code of a candidate word does not match the shape code of the word , the confidence in the candidate word can be reduced , thus it will be further down in the rank ordered list of candidate words . 

  The following table shows results for three untrained writers ( U ) . 

  For these untrained writers , the results are rather discouraging . 

  It is hoped that this stems from the fact that the zonal code given per letter by the recogniser is not as accurate as some overall shape information would be , if it were obtained from the x , y coordinates of the script . 

  An alternative coding for shape that will give better results is required . 

  A less restrictive coding would be more useful for case 2 , but not for case 1 . 

  Any alternative coding technique suggested would have to provide an acceptable trade-off between the reduction of the number of candidates , and selecting the correct word . 

  First letters of words 

  Generally , writers form letters more clearly at the start of words , so the effectiveness of the recogniser at the beginning of words was investigated . 

  The following table shows results for three untrained writers ( U ) , and one trained writer ( T ) . 

  Case 2 -- Suggesting candidates 

  Interaction with syntactic processing 

  The preceding sections investigated a number of potentially useful techniques to aid Case 1 , namely reducing the number of candidate words found by the word look-up . 

  For Case 2a , we could employ some search of the lexicon on our partial information , such as by first letter of the word , approximate word length and word shape . 

  For Case 2b ( and indeed also for Case 2a ) , if some predictive feedback from the syntactic processing stage were also available , ( as detailed in chapter 4 ) the lexicon could be searched on the partial information , and also by probable grammatical category . 

  The lexicon is coded into 109 separate grammar codes . 

  Tables 5.13 i-iv show sample distributions of words in a lexicon of just over 60,000 items , by length , first letter and grammatical category , for some of the letters in the alphabet , and a selection of grammar codes . 

  Obviously the effectiveness of the lexicon search on a combination of the partial information depends greatly on exactly what is being searched for -- a short adjective beginning with z would be almost uniquely identified , whereas a mid length noun beginning with s would be virtually impossible to find . 

  However this data does not take word shape into account . 

  Taken together with shape information the searches should be vastly reduced . 

  This requires much further evaluation and testing , for example to obtain the frequency distribution of the lexicon by word shape ( probably using the reduced zone codes ) , and cross-referencing with this data . 

  Appendix E contains some frequency counts of word shape information using the zone codes introduced in section 5.3.3.2 , for a number of different word lengths . 

  The tables show that this information is not restrictive across a large lexicon , especially for the words of commonly occurring lengths . 

  However for a much smaller vocabulary , the zonal information seems to be more restrictive , especially when applied in combination with word-initial characters . 

  Conclusions 

  The above experiments and discussions have identified some potentially useful information for improving current handwriting recognition systems . 

  We have seen that this information is really only useful if it can be obtained accurately and consistently across writers . 

  However even currently available estimates already show encouraging results in the case 2 scenario described above . 

  In this situation , any information , even vague or partial , is better than nothing , and is in fact useful to restrict any lexicon search . 

  We have also seen that results are much better for trained writers , and it may be that a " general purpose " system for any writer will not prove to be an effective system for cursive handwriting . 

  It appears that the word length information is not very useful unless it can be calculated accurately . 

  However the word shape information seems much more promising , especially when combined with some predictive feedback from the syntactic analyser and some partial character information from the pattern recogniser . 

  The results provide a strong argument for using physical information in a pattern recogniser . 

  The current recogniser should be improved so that better advantage can be taken of these factors . 

  They must be available accurately and consistently if they are to be relied upon . 

  Similarly any predictions from syntactic analysis must contain the correct code . 

  It may be found from testing that this is impossible to achieve due to the ambiguity in previous word positions . 

  Semantic analysis may also be able to provide some feedback mechanism concerning the domain of the sentence so far . 

  This could also suggest candidate words in conjunction with other information , if the unknown word is a content word . 

  Structure for storage and search of information 

  Introduction 

  The preceding discussions have established that in a number of cases , some kind of lexicon search by general information about words would be useful to correct any detected errors within the script recognition system . 

  Given certain pieces of data , it is necessary to calculate how many words in the lexicon match this search criteria . 

  It is not worthwhile retrieving the matched word strings themselves if the number of matches is too large , but it is if this number is within a reasonable limit . 

  A suitable structure for storing the required information in memory must be established . 

  Search methods 

  A standard method for searching any kind of database ( and a lexicon with various pieces of additional information can certainly be thought of as a database ) on a key other than the primary one ( the primary key for a lexicon is the word itself ) is by using inverted list structures ( Claybrook , 1983 ; Date , 1986 ) . 

  An inverted list is simply a list of indexes , it is known as " inverted " because the accessing is in some sense " backwards " . 

  Relations in databases are designed to be searched by the primary keys . 

  Each different piece of information in the structure being accessed has its own list of indexes . 

  Hence all words with grammar code 4 could be accessed together from the relevant list , for example , or all words six letters long , and so on . 

  However inversion would not appear to be particularly appropriate given the actual data involved in this case . 

  A better method can be found , given the two important considerations of speed of search and memory requirements for storage . 

  The chosen method which has been implemented is described below , and became known as the " backwards " , or " inverted look-up " . 

  Inverted look-up structure 

  The required information is at present stored in the trie ( section 4.5.1.2 ) . 

  It can alternatively be stored in an array where the number of array elements is the number of words in the lexicon . 

  The main search criteria are most likely to be length , grammar code and first letter . 

  This should give sufficient cut down of search so that word shape need only be checked on a relatively small number of words . 

  Hence word shape information need not be stored in the inverted look-up structure , it can be generated from the matched words at run-time and compared with the shape of the unknown word being searched for . 

  The information needs to be stored in such a form that will facilitate fast testing of whether it matches what is being searched for . 

  The fastest comparison is bit-wise , so the data is stored in two 32 bit integers as follows . 

  The first letter of the word is stored simply as one of the rightmost 26 bits out of the 32 available in the first long integer . 

  The length and grammatical code are both stored in the second long integer . 

  The rightmost 10 bits are reserved for the length information . 

  Length is stored as exact length 1 , so for example if a word has 5 letters , then bits 4 , 5 and 6 will be set . 

  For words with only one letter , bits 1 and 2 are set . 

  Ten bit positions are sufficient for most words ( 83 % of words in a lexicon of 70,000 words are up to 10 letters long ) , so for words 10 letters long , bits 9 and 10 are set , and for words more than 10 letters long , only bit 10 is set . 

  If the length being searched for is 10 or more letters , a further test checks for a 1 match with the required length . 

  If the bit-wise comparisons match ( and the length is checked more accurately if it is more than 10 ) then the word shape is checked . 

  If this matches , then the array subscript is saved . 

  If the number of successful matches is less than some specified number ( the system has been tested with this limit set to 100 ) , then the actual words for the saved array subscripts are retrieved from the structure . 

  The ten most frequently occurring ( from a corpus frequency count ) are ordered and can either be presented to the user , or passed on to further stages of analysis , depending upon the implementation . 

  The word strings themselves are stored in a simple array structure . 

  This is because it would be wasteful to store a character array as part of the main lexicon structure . 

  Either a maximum word length array would have to be part of the structure , which wastes a lot of memory for the words ( almost all of the lexicon ) which are shorter than that maximum . 

  A dynamic allocation of exactly the right amount of memory for the word can not be implemented because the structure needs to be contiguous in memory for the fast saving and reading in from a file ( as discussed in section 3.3.6 ) . 

  So the main lexicon structure contains a pointer ( actually another array subscript ) to the words array in order to access the word string itself . 

  Given the preceding description of the lexicon structure , there is one major drawback . 

  The lexicon structure contains exactly the same information as the look-up tree . 

  This is a problem not only conceptually ( it is pointless duplicating the information ) , but also from a practical point of view . 

  The information may become inconsistent , and even if this is carefully watched , the two structures are using more memory than is really necessary , due to the duplication . 

  However it is possible to find a method which allows the additional information to be removed from the tree ( as previously mentioned in section 4.5.1.2 ) . 

  It is needed when the ordinary ( forwards ) look-up finds a word , but can just as easily be accessed from the new lexicon structure by using a hashing algorithm on the word string . 

  A hashing algorithm computes the location of a particular array element ( Knuth , 1973 ; Cooper and Clancy , 1985 ; Claybrook , 1983 ) . 

  The algorithm is used both for originally arranging the array , and to check whether a particular value is present . 

  A good hash function will distribute values uniformly throughout a waiting array ( used for access ) called the hash table . 

  If the returned hash value is greater than the defined table size , the modulus operator wraps around back to the start of the table . 

  If a hash function were perfect , it would automatically put every incoming value into a different slot in the hash table . 

  Unfortunately , hash functions tend to be imperfect . 

  Unless the table is made excessively large , two or more different values will eventually be sent to the same slot . 

  This is called a collision . 

  To avoid clustering of collisions , chaining was chosen as a collision resolution technique . 

  Instead of storing the values themselves in the hash table , each table entry becomes the head of a linked list . 

  Incoming values are stored by adding them to the appropriate linked list . 

  Collisions add new elements to the linked list associated with that particular hash value . 

  Some lists end up longer than others , but no values interfere . 

  When searching a chained hash table , the appropriate chain must be traversed to locate the required element . 

  There are no " best " methods with hashing , there are always trade-offs to be considered between computer storage space and search times . 

  A large size hash table means using a large amount of memory , but a minimally-sized hash table means slower searching and resolving collisions . 

  The chosen lexicon of approximately 70,000 words , with an average chain length of 10 , gives a table size of 7,000 . 

  Choosing a prime number as the table size helps to distribute elements evenly throughout the table ( e. g. 7001 ) . 

  Conclusions 

  This new method described above is not noticeably any slower than the old one , nor is it noticeably faster . 

  However it does mean that the additional information can be removed from the look-up tree , which in turn means that a compression method can now be applied to the tree , such as utilising a directed acyclic word graph ( section 3.2.5 and section 3.3.3 ) . 

  Consequently the system is left with a more useful structure for the storage of the lexicon , which can be searched on a number of factors to attempt correction of recognition errors . 

  This structure should be generally more useful in the future because it can easily be expanded to store extra information , should this become necessary . 

  Table 5.14 shows that the combination of hash table and dawg ( last column ) has very similar memory requirements to the uncompressed trie including all extra word information ( second column ) . 

  Experimental results 

  A passage of test data ( written by one person ) was used to test the inverted look-up technique on word positions where no candidate words suggested from the combination of recognised alternative characters were found in the lexicon . 

  Tables 5.15 i-iii give recognition results for three different lexicons . 

  The passage was as follows : 

  Professor Sloman has brought spelling up to date except where this would involve changes in pronunciation , accentuation and capitalization . 

  In the introduction he has covered every aspect of the play under the headings of date , sources , structure and theme , language and metres , staging and texts . 

  It can be seen that as the lexicon size increases , more candidate words are allowable , so sometimes the inverted look-up is not used when it might have found the correct word . 

  However some correct words are not in the smaller lexicons . 

  Larger lexicons also result in more than 100 words matching the partial information more often . 

  Of the four features of additional information , it is the grammar code that is most often incorrect . 

  This is because the prediction algorithm relies on the previous word positions being identified correctly , and this is often not the case . 

  s 

  Conclusions 

  This chapter has identified the kinds of problem areas leading to errors in the handwriting recognition system . 

  These include misspellings and mis-recognitions either due to badly written words or to idiosyncrasies of the pattern recogniser . 

  It appears that most errors will be detected because none of the candidate strings is found to be allowable by the lexical look-up . 

  A number of alternative techniques for error correction were introduced and evaluated . 

  Traditional methods seem unlikely to be useful , mainly due to the ambiguity of an original character string to compare with , and because algorithms may reach explosive and counter-productive proportions if many original candidate strings are used . 

  In practice , a number of intermediate " tweaks " of recognition data seem particularly effective for the types of errors found from the test data collected so far . 

  Indeed they have suggested a few areas where the pattern recogniser seems quite weak . 

  In addition , a number of potentially useful pieces of information were identified . 

  These include extra physical information from the pattern level -- namely some measure of word length and word shape . 

  This might be a count of the number of ascending and descending letters in a word , and their approximate position , i. e. near the beginning , middle or end of a word . 

  First letters of words need to be more accurately recognised , and the number of letter candidates could be reduced , especially as writers form the beginnings of words more clearly . 

  There are also no ligatures to confuse the start of the letter as there are in other letter positions . 

  Other information from higher levels of analysis , for example the grammar code , may also be useful , especially if the possible codes can be identified more accurately . 

  Positions where the identified code is a large category ( e. g. nouns ) , even when subdivided ( e. g. singular countable nouns ) need much better information from other levels . 

  In these cases it may be that searches may have to rely on matches with length , shape and first letter . 

  Semantic analysis may also help by identifying a domain code for content words . 

  The exact method for effectively applying all available information needs more evaluation , but initial experimentation is encouraging . 

  Given this information as used in the treatment of errors , there are indications that it may also be effective to apply it to aid the reduction of the list of candidate strings in word positions where no error has been detected . 

  Again this needs further evaluation , but a useful lexical database structure has been established . 

  A truly interactive system ( after Rumelhart and McClelland's parallel distributed processing model of word perception ) could use higher level information to reject unsuitable candidate words . 

  Other candidates could also be suggested which may be better than those found simply from the pattern recognition and lexical check . 

  In conclusion , it seems that it is in fact possible to get higher levels of analysis to contribute to recognition . 

  They can help to identify errors , and to solve some of these errors with additional help from extra physical information from pattern level . 

  Improved recognition rates can be achieved , the process is no slower , and has obvious leanings to parallelisation of at least some stages of the recognition process . 

  Chapter Six 

  Summary and Discussion 

  Summary 

  The preceding chapters have described a script recognition system which attempts to overcome the inherent problem of ambiguity present in handwriting . 

  A functional system has been demonstrated through experimental results . 

  Using a number of sources of information , including orthography and higher level linguistic constraints , the system shows improved results , and word recognition rates can reach 98 % . 

  Figure 6.1 shows the various stages of the current system . 

  Introduction and review 

  The automatic recognition of handwriting is necessary as a natural mode of communication with computers , and appears to be appropriate for a number of applications . 

  Interest in this field has expanded in recent years , along with interest in speech recognition and optical character recognition ( OCR ) , especially with the advances in technology . 

  However there is insufficient information present in script for unambiguous identification of characters and words . 

  Human readers can understand many badly formed letters and seemingly illegible words due to information gained from the surrounding context . 

  A number of past and current approaches to the area of handwriting recognition were reviewed . 

  These various approaches have a number of problems , and it was established that contextual information is necessary in addition to a pattern recogniser . 

  Some systems have employed letter level and word level information , in the form of n-grams or a limited word look-up . 

  Machine-readable dictionaries can be used as a source of linguistic information . 

  Pattern recognition 

  Pattern recognition techniques were introduced , specifically those used for handwriting . 

  Details of the particular on-line cursive script recogniser and the interface to further levels of processing were given . 

  Briefly , sequences of x , y coordinates are collected , their Freeman vector chain codes are matched to a database , and a number of candidate characters are produced per character position . 

  The output from the pattern recogniser is poor , and requires further processing to improve . 

  Methods commonly used for such processing involve using transitional probabilities ( for example the Viterbi algorithm or Markov modelling ) , using information about how letters combine ( for example n-grams ) , using lexical look-up , or combinations of these . 

  Statistical methods involve selecting one " correct " answer and thus have a built-in margin of error . 

  Experimental results showed that a lexical look-up is more effective than n-grams in terms of reduction of candidate strings . 

  It also gives a more useful reduction because it guarantees lexical output . 

  The limitation of this method is that an input word may not be included in the look-up vocabulary , however this is unavoidable ( see discussion section 6.2 ) . 

  This particular problem also exists for statistical methods since they sample from the language and assume a reliable distribution . 

  Word recognition 

  For effective implementation of a lexical look-up technique , an efficient data structure is needed for representation of the vocabulary . 

  Such a data structure should be the best compromise with regard to processing time and memory requirements . 

  A number of alternative structures ( lists , trees , hash tables and graphs ) were described , illustrated and compared . 

  The speed of negative searches is particularly important because most searches in the recognition system are unsuccessful . 

  Details and results of comparisons between some implemented data structures were presented , and some methods of memory reduction such as tail-end compression and the use of a directed acyclic word graph were discussed . 

  For our system the trie structure ( section 3.2.3.3 ) was most appropriate given the need for grammatical , morphological and semantic information in further stages of the script recognition process , however the reduced-memory tree ( section 3.3.1 ) also gives fast search times and reasonable memory requirements , especially for experimental purposes with different word lists and test data on a limited memory computer . 

  The dawg structure ( section 3.2.5 and section 3.3.3 ) is optimal for memory requirements ( section 3.3.5 ) , but does not allow additional information about words to be stored . 

  The trie structure does allow such information to be stored at the end of word nodes . 

  Acceptable word candidates remaining after lexical look-up are stored for further analysis . 

  Integration 

  Recognition can be improved by using additional linguistic information . 

  Alternative word candidates are combined to form candidate phrases , many of which may be ungrammatical or meaningless . 

  Techniques for the integration of further levels of processing were discussed along with information needed by and produced by each level . 

  These include for example syntax and semantics , and the use of information about compounds , commonly used phrases and idioms . 

  A suitable structure for the transfer and sharing of information between all levels of processing was illustrated . 

  Results showing improved recognition rates after further analysis are presented . 

  The use of compounding information has been implemented , and tested on small samples of test data taken from an Estate Agent's document . 

  The results can be seen in Appendix C which shows the improved recognition when using information about compounds and phrases . 

  A morphological indexing system was developed whereby each word in the lexicon is associated with its root . 

  These indices are stored in the lexical look-up tree . 

  The tree is an ideal site for integrating different types of information because it provides the interface between the low level pattern recognition process and higher level linguistic processes . 

  Additional information such as grammatical category and word frequency can also be accessed via the tree structure , and a set of coded flags was developed to provide details about compounds and case . 

  The recognition system was also extended to allow punctuation marks , digits and other non-alphabetic characters in certain situations . 

  Combining sources of information 

  The different levels of analysis in the handwriting recognition system are similar to those used by the human processing system . 

  Psychological studies of word recognition propose models of interaction between the different levels of processing which combine to give recognition . 

  Such models receive information from both top-down and bottom-up sources , and feedback exists between all levels . 

  This principle could be applied to the current script recognition system to make best use of all available information . 

  It could be especially useful to solve recognition errors . 

  Such errors were studied , along with traditional error correction techniques . 

  Alternative sources of information were investigated , with the aim of discovering additional information which could aid error detection , correction and even recognition . 

  These include physical measures of word length and overall word shape ( e. g. details of ascending and descending characters ) , the accuracy of recognition of the first letters of words , and possible feedback from syntactic analysis . 

  Alternative candidate letters and words may be suggested where recognition has failed to provide any . 

  An " inverted " search method based on partial information about words is discussed . 

  This includes a large hash table structure to store all additional information about the words in the lexicon . 

  Consequently this data can be removed from the lexical look-up tree , which means that the dawg structure mentioned in chapter three becomes viable . 

  Initial experimental results were presented . 

  Discussion 

  The preceding chapters have detailed a script recognition system , which has been summarised above . 

  The results from the current system are insufficient for a really practical system . 

  Improvements are necessary in a number of areas . 

  For example the pattern recogniser could make much better use of partial information , and more accurate information is needed from higher levels of analysis . 

  The exact implementation of different areas of the system will also depend on the particular application and will therefore need to be tailored . 

  The methods described and implemented are not only applicable to on-line cursive script recognition . 

  The techniques are more generally applicable to all areas of text recognition . 

  This includes both on and off-line cursive and unconnected handwriting and optical character recognition ( OCR ) . 

  The data structures developed for the representation of lexicons are useful in any situation where vocabularies are needed , for example in word processors , spelling checkers , or for the classification of electronic documents ( such as e-mail ) . 

  Semantic domain codes can be used for identifying the subject areas of text ( Walker , 1986 ; Rose , 1991 ) . 

  The current system has been developed for English , but the methods would be applicable to other languages which use the same or similar alphabets . 

  The advent of notepad computers brings many new opportunities for applications suitable to this new form of computer . 

  They are lightweight ( a few pounds ) , approximately A4 in size , and easily portable , yet still include powerful processors . 

  The equivalent of a 386 PC is already available , and a 486 is planned . 

  Millions of people work away from their desks , so the situations where such a computer may be appropriate are widespread . 

  These include note-taking almost anywhere , form-filling , taking orders , stock control and so on in warehouses . 

  Notepad computers are already on trial in a hospital accident and emergency unit , and doctors and dentists surgeries are other potential markets . 

  This kind of technology would be useful wherever diagrams need to be drawn with notes , and for almost any type of salesman . 

  Many of these applications may need some form of handwriting recognition . 

  It should be noted however , that many computer applications may not require recognition of pen input . 

  Sometimes it is necessary and desirable to leave hand-drawn and handwritten input as it is . 

  Recognition and associated techniques are also applicable to standard computers of all forms , mainframes , workstations and personal computers , especially in office systems . 

  There may also be educational applications , perhaps for teaching children to write . 

  The system will only recognise standard letter formations so the characters must be written properly by the children . 

  Important work is also progressing in the recognition of engineering drawings for both the lines of the drawings and for text found on the diagrams ( Waite , 1989 ; Dori , 1991 ; Lysak and Kasturi , 1991 ) , and of musical notation ( Fahmy and Blostein , 1991 ) . 

  The current state of handwriting recognition can reach high recognition figures , but only on consistently reasonably neat handwriting , even for a user-dependent system . 

  A pattern recogniser working on some form of segmentation relies on the fact that the input script contains all the necessary characters correctly formed . 

  More often than not these constraints are not met , especially in note-taking situations when users are by necessity writing speedily . 

  Script becomes untidy , can often become illegible , and only comprehensible given the surrounding context , and even then still occasionally impossible to interpret . 

  Script will also contain many abbreviations , often unique to the individual writer . 

  A truly usable recognition system would have to learn from whole word recognition techniques and combine them in some fashion with existing segmentation techniques ( Ho et al , 1991 ; Hull et al , 1991 ) . 

  This may also include some " fuzzy-matching " ( nearest matches ) of the lexicon on partial information . 

  For example writers usually form the beginnings of words reasonably well , but often this tails off towards the ends of words . 

  Partial matches with the lexicon may have a few characters from the beginning of a word , together with approximate word shape information ( see also section 6.3 ) . 

  Assuming the lexicon includes all words necessary , the recognition process can be lexically driven , in other words the pattern recogniser need not pursue segmentations which lead to characters that can not follow the preceding characters because that sequence does not occur in any of the words in the lexicon . 

  The lexicon would have to include the usual forms of abbreviations used by a particular writer . 

  The above considerations make a general purpose handwriting recognition system a virtual impossibility . 

  The particular application must be tailored ( in terms of lexicon ) and trained for individual users . 

  Any training should be user-friendly to a nave user -- a doctor or warehouse clerk does not want to be concerned with the segmentation required for handwriting recognition . 

  Different recognisers have different areas of strength and weakness , so it may be possible to combine them into one system . 

  The final decision about a word's identity would be made by combining the results of all recognisers in use , assuming lexical output from each . 

  The most meaningful and effective way in which such output can be combined is a topic of on-going research ( Hull et al , 1991 ) . 

  Hull has found that a reasonable measure appears to be the " borda " count , which is a sum of the distance of a particular word from the bottom of each ranking in which it occurs . 

  The word with the maximum borda count is chosen as the best candidate . 

  There will always be cases where the look-up either fails to find any allowable strings , or the correct word ( i. e. the input word of script ) is not in the list of allowable strings . 

  Chapter five dealt with misspellings and mis-recognitions , but there are always going to be cases when the input word is not in the look-up word list . 

  Obviously the choice of which words are included in the look-up word list is paramount to the efficiency of the system . 

  Too short a list means that the input words will quite often be missed , and too long a list can mean that the list of allowable candidate strings is vast , and will often contain words that most people would not recognise as English words . 

  In fact , however complete a word list you may think you have , it will never give full coverage ( Sampson , 1989 ) . 

  It is therefore better to reach some compromise , and perhaps use a word list tailored to the particular domain . 

  It may be appropriate to have a basic core vocabulary in use all the time , with additional lexicons available depending on the particular domain of application . 

  There will also be the need for a user-specific lexicon with the facility to add and delete items , especially for proper nouns , individual abbreviations and misspellings , as well as words which may have been missed by the other dictionaries . 

  For situations when all other attempts to suggest a word have failed , it would be preferable to provide a string of characters which is in some way a best guess , even if that string is not a word known to the lexicon . 

  A closest match algorithm would be of use here , or some combination of the highest rated character candidates which contains frequently occurring sequences . 

  The orthographic information stored in the lexical look-up tree could be used in a similar way to n-gram look-up discussed earlier , whereby non-occurring letter sequences are ruled out , and alternative character candidates are tried instead . 

  General word shape information could be used in addition . 

  To provide a user-friendly environment based upon the latest Human Computer Interface techniques , the script recognition system could incorporate an interactive gesture-based front-end ( Welbourn and Whitrow , 1989 ; Wilson and Whitrow , forthcoming ) . 

  This may be as part of a pen-driven word processor where already existing text can be edited as with pen and paper at present . 

  Gesture-based editing symbols for insert , delete , move text and so on would be included , and any inserted or altered text could be handwritten and recognised . 

  Such systems would also be useful for the recognition and editing of diagrams . 

  Other kinds of information give cues in written language , for example the layout of the writing ( or typescript ) . 

  This includes the spacing between sections of text , the paragraphs , headings , subheadings and so on . 

  This information is useful for syntax , and semantics ( for example , a heading gives clues to the domain or content of following text ) . 

  Form filling applications can give this kind of information accurately , for example where an address or a telephone number is expected , so the restrictions put on allowable strings are even greater . 

  Both syntactic and semantic information could be used more effectively than at present . 

  Some kind of feedback process could be implemented whereby all levels of analysis can learn from the identification of the correct words as chosen by the user ( see figure 6.2 ) . 

  The system should assume that the top-rated candidates are correct unless the user chooses another of the existing candidates or enters an alternative word . 

  Given this new information , both the syntax and semantic processors can update their information accordingly . 

  This should improve any predictions made for unknown or mis-recognised words . 

  Not only can the pattern recognition stage be lexically-driven , but suggestions can also be made from higher level knowledge which will affect the recognition process . 

  As words are confirmed , all levels should be able to improve their future results . 

  The large numbers of incorrect candidates contribute to the deterioration in performance of the higher levels of analysis . 

  If these numbers can be reduced by a system that learns , the over all recognition performance should be increased . 

  Future work 

  There are a number of areas where further work would be most important . 

  Some of these have been identified in the above discussion . 

  The following ideas are more immediately applicable to the current system . 

  The pattern recogniser should be improved , perhaps by the use of some interactive techniques whereby the recogniser and the lexical look-up work together so that the look-up may be able to predict which characters could be next within a word . 

  Not only may the recogniser be able to be lexically-driven , but other levels of information ( e. g. syntax and semantics ) should also be able to direct the pattern recognition . 

  In fact all levels should be able to interact and feed information back to each other . 

  The current architecture will not easily allow this , because the processes are separate and serial . 

  Alternative architectures including some parallelisation would appear to be very useful for this situation ( see figure 6.2 ) . 

  The pattern recognition should also be able to identify the beginnings of words much more accurately than at present , and more investigation of the efficacy of some measure of word length would be useful . 

  Whole word recognition would appear to have its place especially when used in conjunction with other recognition techniques , but the current recogniser does not supply this type of information . 

  It may be that a separate recogniser could be constructed that would concentrate on these sort of features , i. e. the shape of a word found from its ascending and descending characters . 

  In a lexicon of only 4,000 words , the most frequently occurring tri-gram at the start of a word only occurs 52 times ( it is the tri-gram pro ) . 

  A measure of word shape information such as the reduced zone code discussed in section 5.3.3.2 is then restrictive across those 52 words . 

  More details of the frequency distribution of word-initial tri-grams are given in Appendix E. 

  The system should be tailored to a particular domain , as accuracy can be much greater in a restricted situation . 

  The layout of documents can provide additional information which also places constraints on the recognition process . 

  For example in the layout of a letter , different dictionaries should perhaps be accessed in different parts of the letter . 

  A form filling application would also restrict recognition to digits or capital letters in certain places . 

  An order form for spare parts for motor cars would probably only have to recognise digits and part names , which would be from a small domain-specific lexicon . 

  Conclusions 

  To conclude , a basic script recognition system has been demonstrated . 

  It is functional , and gives very encouraging results . 

  At present the system allows a large vocabulary of English words which can be represented in memory with practical size and processing requirements , and is searchable in real time . 

  Recognition rates are as yet insufficient for a practical system , and need considerable improvement . 

  The preceding chapters have indicated some areas where improvements need to be made , and have suggested some techniques for this . 

  This system could be useful in a number of situations ( as discussed above ) , and the lexical look-up and use of additional linguistic information is not restricted to on-line handwriting recognition . 

  As an area for on-going research , the system could be both extended to allow input from other recognisers for alternative applications , and also restricted to particular domains . 

  PART ONE 

  When , sometimes , I think back on the beauty of life on a South Seas island , I start to wonder how fate could possibly have propelled me from the rain and bedraggled leafless winter trees of England to such distant enchantment . 

  And when I daydream of its beauty I think , too , of the people I met on Koraloona , of Doc Reid , the eccentric , wayward medic who first taught me about the island ; Bill Robins , the captain of the Mantela when our ship was attacked , and who before that was to become my first real friend ; Jason Purvis , the starving beachcomber and would-be great novelist who at last did achieve a kind of fame ; Paula Reece , the beautiful American with cold , appraising eyes who so loved the island -- and several of its free and happy inhabitants . 

  Then there was Tiare , named after Polynesia's whitest flower , who had inherited a secret hoard of paintings from her artist father , paintings that were to be a turning point in the history of the island . 

  Above all , there was Tiare's daughter Aleena . 

  I can still see her as I first met her , a skinny , energetic schoolgirl with a flower in her shining black hair , who quickly grew into a beautiful woman and whose life became entwined with mine as together we triumphed over disease , over prejudice and even over war . 

  Our travels led us to places as far apart as Sanderstown , San Francisco , New York , and London -- all in search of an " insurance " that would guarantee for us peace and tranquillity on Koraloona , the most beautiful island of the whole beautiful Moto Varu archipelago . 

  There was no reason , except chance , why I should ever have travelled to live in a remote island on the other side of the world , for my future in England had been mapped out . 

  Our family , which lived in Renishaw Road in Nottingham , was always well off , if never rich . 

  My father , Herbert Masters , was an electrical engineer , and enlisted in the army soon after I was born , in 1914 . 

  He saw service in France , the Middle East and England as a captain in the Signals Service of the Royal Engineers , and learned his future trade well . 

  By the time he was demobbed he was the nearest thing to a genius when handling the military gadgetry of radio signals and wireless telephony that the army produced . 

  I suppose it was inevitable that in 1918 he should capitalise on his expertise at a time when the post-war craze for the new-fangled wireless sets was at its height . 

  Before the year was out my father had invested his small gratuity , his savings -- for my mother had worked while he was at war -- and opened a shop near the Market Place , specialising in selling components for those who wanted to build their own sets . 

  It sold spare parts that were never stocked in larger shops . 

  More important , my father had learned the theory as well as the practice of " wireless telephony " , so he was that rare individual , a man who could offer practical advice on how best to use the components he bought from Marconi's , Cossor , Edison-Swan , Oldham Batteries and other suppliers . 

  He was astonishing . 

  Why , he even once built me a tiny crystal set in an empty match box saying , " Here , Kit . 

  That'll give your friends something to talk about . " 

  Early in the 1920s , Father opened a second shop , then a third , this time in Mansfield . 

  He was so successful that " Masters of Notts " seemed almost as much of a neighbourhood byword as " Boots the Chemists " . 

  One thing my father instinctively knew : I would never join his firm unless events forced me to . 

  I do not think he minded , for once he said to me , " You cannot do a job like mine unless you're fascinated by it " , and I was not . 

  Though I spent my outdoor time playing any game I could , from cricket , tennis , football or boxing at the local gym , all my indoor time was spent buried in books . 

  I was an insatiable reader , and whenever I did visit Father at one of his shops , I invariably managed to wheedle a couple of batteries out of him -- so that I could read in bed under the bedclothes . 

  One day , after a particularly good school report , Father took me for a walk past a second-hand bookstore where I often browsed enviously . 

  " I saw a book here that might interest you , " he said . 

  It was a heavy leather-bound copy of Don Quixote , dramatically illustrated by a man whose name meant nothing to me at that time , Gustave Dor . 

  But the full-page pictures brought the heroic figure to life . 

  " Let us call it an extra prize for this term . " 

  Father carried the parcel as we walked back . 

  " Because I've been thinking , Kit . 

  If you agree , I'd like to send you to Oxford . 

  Your headmaster says he can get you a place . 

  And Oxford ! -- it was something I was never able to do myself . 

  How do you feel about it ? " 

  I did not hesitate . 

  " I'd love to , " I cried . 

  By now I had a baby sister Clare , and it was something that happened to her which helped to shape my destiny and provided the first step on my road to Koraloona . 

  Clare had been born in 1919 , and by the time she was twelve she had grown into a tomboy , excited by all sports -- not only hockey , but sometimes she even helped out if we were short of a player for an improvised soccer game in the park . 

  Mother disapproved . 

  She was a loving mother , tall and thin and delighted at the social success of " Captain " Masters , the polite way the bank manager doffed his hat to her , and that she was not the only mother who was sending her son to Oxford . 

  But as for sending Clare Masters to play football ! 

  " It's undignified and unladylike , " she said . 

  Even worse , Clare , with her ruddy , apple-red cheeks , used successfully to beg Father to get stand seats at Meadow Lane for her as well as me and himself when Notts County played at home . 

  I sympathised with her for , after all , Notts County was the oldest league club in the world , and this was the season when Tom Keetley scored a record thirty-nine goals and we came top of Third Division South . 

  " It'd be like missing part of the world scene , " cried Clare . 

  " It's like behaving in an unladylike fashion , " sniffed Mother , for , of course , Father could refuse us nothing , and Mother did add , " Well , let us forget it . 

  Sit down all of you in the dining-room , and have your tea . 

  The muffins are hot and buttered and sprinkled with salt . " 

  Clare had such a sense of adventure -- and it was this love of an active life that made what happened doubly hard to bear . 

  That was the year -- 1931 -- when the Youth Hostels Association was formed , and Clare went on one of their first trips , organised by the local school , to a hostel in the Dukeries , not far north in Lincolnshire . 

  This despite another sniff of disapproval from Mother . 

  The trip was supposed to last a week . 

  After three days , the schoolmistress in charge phoned . 

  Mother answered , then she came into the sitting-room and announced , " Clare's coming home . " 

  " Coming home ? " 

  Father echoed . 

  " Has she done something wrong ? " 

  " No . 

  She's got a bad cold or'flu and she's running a temperature , " said Mother in an " I told you so " voice . 

  " One of the mistresses is driving her back . 

  She says do not worry , but it's wiser to be on the safe side . 

  She will be home this evening . " 

  When she did arrive , my parents at first thought it was'flu . 

  Hundreds of thousands had died in the post-war'flu epidemic , so anyone who caught it -- especially children -- was bundled off to bed , as Clare was , with a hot water bottle , some aspirin , and a glass of hot milk with an eggspoonful of whisky in it . 

  There was no improvement ; she continued to have a temperature . 

  The usual'flu stiffness and aching in the muscles did not go away as it should have done , so Father sent for Dr Allott , our family physician , a patient , gentle old man who always arrived in an Essex sedan and -- more important to us -- always carried a pocketful of toffees to give away to children . 

  I was not present when Dr Allott examined Clare , of course , but I could sense the worry in my parents . 

  Clare was told she was in for a long stay in bed , and Mother moved in a divan to sleep next to her . 

  Dr Allott came every day . 

  He , too , looked grave , and I caught snatches of meaningless ( to me ) words ... " cerebrospinal fluid ... lumbar puncture ... muscular reflexes " . 

  All these phrases occurred frequently . 

  Fascinated , I finally waylaid Dr Allott in the street one day , just after he'd paid us a visit , and I plucked up courage to ask him what these strange words meant . 

  I shall always be grateful to him for not giving me the usual reply of an adult to a curious child's questions , " You're too young to understand . " 

  " Well , " he said , " it's not too easy to answer without giving you a long lecture on the structure of the body . " 

  He handed me a toffee , climbed into his car , beckoned me to sit on the other front seat for a few minutes , and removed the celluloid sidescreen to give us more fresh air . 

  " What it amounts to , " he explained , " is that your sister has a mild attack of a disease we call infantile paralysis . 

  It's an illness we do not know much about , but sometimes it affects the muscles of a leg or an arm . 

  Perhaps if it's a bad case the patient has to wear a special boot or keep the leg held straight with iron braces . " 

  " Will Clare have to wear a brace ? " 

  I asked -- with , I must admit , rather more clinical curiosity than compassion . 

  " I hope not . 

  I am going to send round a nurse who'll massage the affected muscles and help her with exercises . 

  In the present state of medical knowledge , there's little more we can do . " 

  " It's a funny sort of name , " I said . 

  " Well actually , " said Dr Allott , " infantile paralysis is not its real name . 

  When we're among ourselves we call it by its proper name , which is poliomyelitis . 

  That's been its name since 1880 , but it's a bit of a mouthful , even when we doctors call it polio for short . 

  And it means nothing to the layman , two Greek words meaning " grey " and " marrow " , so we've given it an easier name , infantile paralysis , which at least is English . " 

  I did not take in all he said , but I learned something . 

  And I felt anger and bitterness . 

  I jumped out of the car with a polite " Thank you , sir " , but when I went in , I kicked our gate shut with a burst of temper . 

  How could they do this to Clare , who loved to play games ? 

  Father shook his head sympathetically , but said , " Temper , Kit , never did anyone any good . " 

  Clare never fully recovered . 

  She had to wear a brace for many years before she was well enough to walk with two sticks , and I still carry in my mind the picture of her trying to walk around the room and on the landing , hobbling in her iron braces . 

  When she got back into bed I used to cry " Poor Clare ! " and almost burst into tears as I hugged her . 

  " Do not worry , I am going to get well , " she said spryly . 

  " Dr Allott has promised me I will . " 

  " Well , I am going to see that this sort of thing never happens again , " I said . 

  " You are ? " 

  She managed a smile . 

  " How ? " 

  " I am going to become a doctor . 

  A famous one . 

  And I am going to find out how to cure polio . " 

  Though I was only sixteen , it was a decision from which I never wavered . 

  I was at Nottingham Grammar School , I always came top in science , and literature , and I loved reading and learning , which I knew would be vital to become a doctor . 

  Perhaps it was one of those impetuous decisions that were always earning me reproaches , but it was also a logical step because of my interests . 

  And it delighted my father . 

  Apart from other considerations , he -- and specially Mother -- believed that my becoming a doctor would be a step up the social ladder . 

  Dr Allott advised me to be entered for Wadham , Oxford's " medical " college , and I arrived there when I was eighteen . 

  The trouble with Oxford , as Bernard Shaw has written , is that it is the only place where you can both have your cake and eat it . 

  I loved the cake and ate it all . 

  The university opened up for me a freedom I never knew existed . 

  From one friend I learned to appreciate classical music played on his HMV portable . 

  Many of the records -- " pinched " from or discarded by his musical family -- were scratched and worn , but it was Music with a capital " M " and the first time I heard the Chopin first piano concerto , we nearly had a fight because I insisted on playing it right through four times . 

  Another friend was equally enthusiastic about a new kind of " pop " music , the lilting sound of Hawaiian guitars . 

  A third introduced me to the delights of the art world , which meant cheap day-trips to London to browse for hours in the Tate or the National Gallery . 

  All these were treasures unrevealed to me by my doting father who was more concerned with induction coils . 

  And I was fortunate in that I had friends -- musical and artistic -- who knew so much more about these subjects than I did , and enjoyed sharing their knowledge with me . 

  They were two loves which never deserted me . 

  With equal excitement I entered into the sports side of Oxford . 

  Perhaps because I was hot-tempered at times , I became what used to be called a " natural " as a boxer . 

  Bashing one of my peers in the ring released a kind of spring inside me . 

  I did not enjoy hurting friends , but each blow did in some way help me to cope with a temper . 

  And in the end , to my father's real pride , I got a Blue . 

  But one thing was niggling away at my conscience ( for want of a better word ) . 

  I was enjoying Oxford so much that I sometimes forgot that moment in Clare's bedroom when I made my decision about my future vocation . 

  I was not doing anything to speed up my role as a would-be doctor , so during my last year at Oxford , where I had planned to stay for three years before going to London for the real hard medical training , I arranged ( again through Dr Allott ) to spend my final long vac helping out as a general dogsbody at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases in Queen Square , central London , where there was a special unit investigating Heine-Medin's disease , the original name for polio , and -- especially in the 1930s -- doing research into the spinal aspects . 

  The team was led by a remarkable man , Dr Harvey Cushing . 

  It took me only a few weeks to realise that the medical world would never come to grips with polio until it could isolate the virus which caused it . 

  Finally I was enrolled at the Royal College of Physicians . 

  My father paid for my digs in Paddington and gave me a pound a week pocket money , together with what he called " travelling expenses " for my regular visit home ( home and a good , square meal ) , and to spend some time with Clare who was fifteen and slowly , very slowly , improving . 

  Usually , to please Father , I would also go on a quick visit to one of his shops and sometimes I wondered if they were doing as well as he pretended . 

  Trade seemed slack . 

  The Depression did not help . 

  But he shrugged off falling receipts . 

  " It will pick up , " he said . 

  I did not give the matter much thought , specially when Clare remarked that same evening that she had heard Father tell Mother , " Do not worry . 

  We can weather this bad period . " 

  And , of course , when you are young , you are always looking forward , and I had all the answers ready when Clare asked me , " But what about your plans ? " 

  " Well , Father's promised to buy me a small practice when I am qualified , which will be in a few months . 

  Of course , I shall have to do an internship first , then a stint as a registrar before I can even think of looking around for a practice of my own . " 

  " But that's wonderful . 

  It'd make you happy . " 

  " Everyone likes to be his own boss . 

  That's always been one of Father's maxims . 

  And , of course , a practice of my own -- maybe somewhere in the East End of London to start with . " 

  " Why not in Nottingham ? 

  Why the East End of London ? " 

  " Cheapest , " I laughed . 

  " I want to stay in London , because only then will I get the chance to do some research into polio , like I did during that long vac . " 

  We were all so busy making plans , living dreams , that somehow Clare and I -- and perhaps Mother too -- were blinded to the truth , so evident around us : the unemployment figures , the era of mass production , a new industrial revolution in which machines did the work of thousands of men ; even the fact that " wireless " was no longer a novelty . 

  Wireless had become radio -- an item of furniture , often bought in a big store together with a fridge . 

  We never noticed it during the time it took for me to qualify and start work as an intern at St Andrew's in Marylebone . 

  The first warnings of impending disaster arrived in a letter from Clare who wrote , " Poor Father is feeling very down , he's had to close the Mansfield shop " . 

  By the time I had been an intern for a few more months , doing my rounds in my white coat with stethoscope dangling round my neck ( and feeling very important ) , Father had had to close down the second branch , leaving -- for the time being -- only the original shop which he had opened near the Market Place where the annual Goose Fair was held . 

  I went up for a weekend . 

  Father was very quiet , Mother was dejected beyond words . 

  She had never been a snob in the unpleasant sense of the word , but she had always set great store by Father's material success , and later by my having been to Oxford and then on my becoming a doctor . 

  Now the world seemed to be crumbling around us -- her world especially . 

  " I do not see how we can carry on much longer , " Father admitted to me . 

  " It's the end of an adventure that I thought would last for ever . 

  Thank God you're qualified . 

  If this had happened a few years earlier -- " 

  " But if you do close the whole business down , " I asked , " how ... what will you do for money ? " 

  He gave a wry smile . 

  " It's a funny world , " he said . 

  " Financially I will not be too badly off . 

  I can realise my stock and pay twenty bob in the pound if I go into voluntary liquidation now , before Masters of Notts gets deeper into trouble . 

  And I've already been offered a job as buyer for a group of chain stores which have each got a radio department . 

  It will not pay as much , but we will not starve . 

  But it's the nasty business of disposing of stock , and having to fire men who've been with me for years . 

  I can do nothing to help except give them good references and a few quid to tide them over . 

  But , " with one last sigh and a brave smile , " there's nothing quite like being your own boss . 

  Thank God you shall be your own boss as a doctor . " 

  A few weeks later Masters of Notts went into voluntary liquidation , paying twenty shillings in the pound as Father had said they would . 

  In a way the actual liquidation brought with it a curious sense of relief . 

  The prospect had been hanging over us for so many months that once Father ceased trading , it was as though the weight of worry was lifted . 

  But Father's new life did have a few problems . 

  The promised job with the chain stores was cancelled at the last moment " due to the Depression " , the standard excuse . 

  Father had to draw on his modest savings . 

  He applied for job after job , unsuccessfully , for weeks : he was in his early fifties , and this was the era of " too old at forty " , let alone fifty . 

  We had to move from Renishaw Road to a smaller house in Thorne Road at the other end of Nottingham , a move dictated by financial considerations , but which in a way pleased Mother as it helped to distance her from her old set of friends . 

  In the end Father landed a job that was not too bad , working as a technical engineer for Marconi's , whose goods he had bought for so many years . 

  There was no money left over for me to live in any " style " . 

  But I moved into cheaper digs near the hospital and did manage to keep the second-hand Austin Seven I had bought five years previously . 

  But slices of bad luck never come singly . 

  And when I recall the shattering consequences of what happened one night a month or so later , I think of Hamlet , saying " When sorrows come , they come not single spies , But in battalions . " 

  I had no premonition of disaster when I was sent off to answer a call from a Mrs Dunston . 

  I looked up her address on our hospital street map in the reception room -- Rockingham Gardens , just behind the Elephant and Castle ; and it was a hell of a drive across London , on streets glistening after a day when heavy rain had hardly stopped . 

  The local doctor had sent for St Andrew's ( hardly expecting me ) because the patient had been bringing up blood , and St Andrew's had a specialist unit dealing with internal bleeding . 

  I was no expert , but I would know enough to make a preliminary diagnosis and summon an ambulance if I had to arrange for her to be taken into hospital . 

  In fact , there was nothing really wrong with her , and I did what I could to soothe her . 

  She had been spitting blood after a bad bout of coughing , but one look at the sputum told me it was clean blood . 

  She had probably broken a tiny blood vessel in the lung area and it was bleeding , but not seriously . 

  All the same , heavy coughing always meant the possibility of water on the lungs which in turn could lead to pneumonia , so I gave her an injection of vitamin K , to thicken the blood , a sleeping pill , some linctus which contained a tiny amount of morphine , and also told her , " Take one of these pills every morning for a week . " 

  They were diuretic pills to encourage patients to get rid of excess water quickly . 

  " And if you do not feel any better in a couple of days -- if the bleeding does not stop when you cough -- let us know . " 

  I set off back to the hospital -- not in the best of tempers after a foul drive in filthy weather -- and it was on the way home , as the wet lamps marched towards me , that it happened . 

  I was driving through the warren of small , mean , shop-lined streets towards St George's Circus where Lambeth Road meets Blackfriars Road , leading to the bridge . 

  In one small street -- later to be identified as Keyworth Street -- I saw what seemed to be a fight ahead of me outside a shop . 

  My first instinct was to back the car and find a different way round , but then in the headlights I saw that three or four men were all dressed in black shirts . 

  And they were attacking one man , while a woman , presumably his wife or daughter , was crying by the side of the street . 

  I knew immediately who they were -- Oswald Mosley's Blackshirts , indulging in their favourite pastime of Jewbaiting . 

  I still had not actually thought of doing anything until the woman ran towards me and cried , " Help , please . 

  They're going to kill my father . " 

  " You run for help , " I cried . 

  " There's always some police by the Circus , " I knew they were there because of the Jewish population around the area -- and the frequent Mosley British Fascist parades . 

  She ran off . 

  I jumped out of the car , still not knowing quite how to argue with those toughs a bare twenty yards away , until I arrived ; but the sickening sight settled my course of action . 

  Instinctively I had carried with me my heavy medical case ; perhaps I might need it . 

  But then I saw the victim . 

  He was old , bent , bearded , and one man was holding him back while the other two kicked and thumped him . 

  Without a second's thought I swung my medical case straight into the face of one of the thumpers . 

  The case burst open , the contents flying all over the place , and with a cry of astonishment the man fell , his face bleeding . 

  The other man turned with a snarl to attack me , while the third grabbed the Jew . 

  I had dropped my bag as I hit the first man , but that did not matter . 

  With my boxing Blue , I was not afraid of a thug . 

  As he tried to grab me , I feinted , slipped back to make him follow me , knowing he would think I was afraid , and then I let him have a classic straight left that hit him on the point of the jaw . 

  He fell on to the pavement , out like a light . 

  And as I started to go for the third man , I heard the sound of police whistles , and then two policemen arrived with the woman , and the third thug ran for it . 

  The old man had sunk to his knees , so , ignoring the Blackshirt on the pavement , I tried to rescue what I could from my medicine case and give him some first aid . 

  I laid him further along on the pavement , under his broken and smashed shop front , which proclaimed his trade : Rabinowitz Tailors . 

  The shop owner was not too badly hurt and as the policemen arrived and asked me , " You all right , sir ? " 

  I replied , " Thank you , Officer . 

  I am a doctor . 

  I was driving past and tried to stop this poor devil getting beaten up . 

  I hit this man in the face . " 

  " And this one here ? " asked the policeman . 

  " I gave him a straight left . 

  He will come round soon . 

  Thanks for coming to my help . 

  If you get a basin of water from the old man's shop and pour it over the man , it will help . " 

  I prepared to collect the rest of my medicines and make for the hospital , when the policeman said to me , " Excuse me , sir . 

  Do not you think you'd better take a look at this fellow you knocked out ? 

  His'ead's hanging in a funny sort of way . " 

  It was the first time I had taken a close look at him . 

  I lifted his head gently with my right hand -- and felt the hot , sticky blood covering the back of his skull . 

  I knew instinctively what had happened . 

  As I hit him he must have fallen and hit the back of his head on the edge of the sharp pavement . 

  With the help of one of the policemen I turned the man over . 

  The back of his head was split wide open . 

  I did not need any further examination to know that the man was dead . 

  " Better send for an ambulance , " I said heavily , taking in the scene as I wondered what to do next . 

  It had started to rain again , not heavily but miserably . 

  A few yards away , sitting on the pavement , was the thug whose face I had hit ; he was shouting , " You killed him , you bastard ! " 

  The other policeman was helping the man and his daughter into their shop . 

  On the left lay a corpse . 

  And facing me was a thoughtful policeman . 

  " I shall have to report it to the station , doctor , " he started . 

  " Of course you must , " I said . 

  " It was an accident , but you must do your duty . " 

  I gave him all the particulars he needed -- my name , address , the hospital where I worked , and the number of my Austin Seven . 

  " Let us hope for the best , sir , " he said . 

  " As far as I am concerned , I'd like to see all these bleeding fascists dead . 

  But -- " 

  " Do not worry , " I said more cheerfully than I felt . 

  " Can I go now , Officer , while you summon the ambulance ? 

  Or can I help you ? " 

  " Thank you , sir . 

  Do not worry . 

  The station's only five minutes away along Waterloo Road . " 

  And turning to his colleague he said , " Charley , keep an eye on these buggers while I nip round to the station . " 

  " Do you think I could go now ? 

  I am only anxious that the hospital might wonder what's happened to me . " 

  " I do not see why not . 

  We know what's happened . 

  I am afraid someone from Waterloo Road Station will contact you . 

  They will want you to make a statement . 

  After all , a man has died , sir . " 

  " Of course . " 

  Then , at last I went . 

  And the next morning told the hospital authorities in full exactly what had happened . 

  Three days later I made a statement . 

  The police were very sympathetic , but as the inspector in charge told me , " I shall have to hand over the papers to the Director of Public Prosecutions -- or one of his staff . 

  To decide what action to take , whether to charge you . " 

  " You think they might ? " 

  I was only asking for confirmation of what I expected . 

  They would have to charge me with manslaughter . 

  " I am afraid so , Doctor . 

  It's a bit of bad luck for you , getting entangled with a group of bastards , and if it's any comfort to you , I shall lay a pound to a penny that you shall go free if there's a trial . " 

  " That's some consolation , " I said wryly . 

  " But it's the publicity that worries me . 

  You know what stuffed shirts the medical profession are . 

  Especially the older doctors . " 

  " We will do everything to keep it out of the press , " he promised me . 

  But no one could . 

  Even before I was charged , one of the evening papers -- there were three in London then , the Standard , the News and the Star -- had a front-page headline : BLACKSHIRT DIES IN FIGHT WITH MYSTERY DOCTOR . 

  No name was mentioned at the time , and ten days later I was formally charged with manslaughter . 

  The case was adjourned for ten days , and I was allowed bail , but the hospital governors thought it best for me to be suspended on full pay until after the inquest had been held . 

  So after giving details of my " movements " to the police , I drove up to Nottingham to spend a few days with the family . 

  Even that provided little consolation . 

  Over the years we had become so attached to Renishaw Road that our new , smaller house in Thorne Road seemed cold and indifferent to our worries . 

  The only good news to offset my " disgrace " was that Father had proved such a success at Marconi's that he had been appointed an assistant manager in the research department dealing with radio materials . 

  It did his ego a power of good . 

  " All the same , " he sighed , " you're so impetuous , Kit ! 

  How often have I begged you to keep that temper of yours in check . 

  You're so impulsive . " 

  " I think he was brave to do what he did . " 

  Clare stood up for me . 

  " You're a hero . " 

  " Not to Mother , " I said sadly , for she was taking the " disgrace " very badly . 

  " After all , " she said , " you did not have to help . 

  The police station was only five minutes away . " 

  On the other hand , the inspector's belief that I would never be punished proved only too true when I returned to London and the inquest was held . 

  The evidence that it was an accident brought about by bullies was overwhelming , especially at a time when 9 out of 10 Britons were engulfed in a tide of hate for Hitler's British Mosley stooges . 

  But what really made it impossible for anyone to convict me was when , to my astonishment , a frail , bent old man appeared in the witness box . 

  At first I did not know who the bearded man was for ( as I realise now ) I had been too busy participating to see . 

  But this was dear old Mr Rabinowitz himself , spruced up , a new suit , who told in a quavering voice how this perfect stranger had come to his aid after the Blackshirts had smashed open his tailor's shop . 

  " Sir , " he said to the court , " I would be a dead man by now if it had not been for this gentleman . " 

  Added to that , the policeman gave evidence , mentioning my concern , and also adding that " It was a clean-cut blow to the jaw , sir , as you would expect from a man who got an Oxford Blue for boxing . " 

  I was found Not Guilty . 

  That was fine , but I had not reckoned with the excitement the case aroused in the popular press . 

  They seized on every detail of the evidence and plastered them over their front pages . 

  Clare , walking with a stick now , though still in braces , had come to London to lend me moral support -- Father , of course , could not just leave his job at will . 

  And it was she who brought me the first evening paper . 

  " Oh God ! " 

  I groaned over coffee at Lyons' tea shop . 

  " That's ruined me ! " 

  " Ruined you ! " 

  Her eyes were sparkling . 

  " You're a hero ! " 

  " Not to the hospital . " 

  I managed a smile as I read the page-one story : OXFORD BLUE BEATS MOSLEY THUG SAVES LIFE OF JEWISH VICTIM . 

  And underneath the story started : Gallant young Dr Kit Masters , Oxford Boxing Blue , beat off a gang of three Blackshirts when he found them attacking an old man who ran a tailor's shop . 

  He hit one so hard that he later died , and injured another so badly that he is still in hospital . 

  The victim he helped said he owed his life to ... and there was more of the same . 

  " They will fire me for this . " 

  I paid the fourpence for two coffees , and after I had seen Clare to her train back home , went to St Andrew's to make a few notes of plans to defend myself , for I knew it would not be long before I faced a new " trial " -- by the hospital's board of governors . 

  Two days later I was summoned to appear before them . 

  I had never met the head of governors , Dr Arnold Barton , though I had seen him at several functions , a thin , tall , stern-faced , lantern-jawed streak of a man who rarely seemed to smile . 

  After I had been kept waiting for a few moments in an ante-room , I was ushered into the main boardroom where Dr Barton and six colleagues were seated around a long , rectangular , polished table . 

  One chair at the bottom of the table was empty , and as I came in Dr Barton , with hardly more than a nod in my direction , indicated the chair and said sternly , " You may sit , Doctor Masters , while we ask you a few questions . " 

  I sat without a word . 

  " Though I appreciate your bravery in going to aid an old man , " Barton began , " the medical profession can not countenance the kind of newspaper scandal and unsavoury publicity that you have brought to St Andrew's . " 

  " But , sir , " I protested almost angrily . 

  " You would not want me to let an old man get beaten up and do nothing . " 

  " Why did not you call the police instead of getting mixed up in such an event ? " one of the governors asked . 

  " Because I did not know where the police station was , " I retorted . 

  It seemed so unfair to have faced one trial to prove my innocence , and now to face a kind of drumhead court martial as though I were guilty . 

  " Sir , " I addressed Dr Barton . 

  " I have had my trial . 

  I have been declared innocent . 

  Just as there cannot be one law for the rich , one for the poor , there cannot be one law for men , one for doctors . 

  It's not fair , sir . " 

  For a moment the expression of the stern-faced Dr Barton softened and he said more gently , " I am afraid you are wrong , Doctor . 

  There are two sets of laws . 

  You have proved your innocence , and you are not on trial to prove that again . 

  What is at stake here is not innocence of a crime , but your reputation , and by a medical , not a legal tribunal . " 

  Another member of the panel added , " We have nothing but admiration for the way you tackled those thugs , Doctor . 

  But please remember what Doctor Barton has pointed out -- you are not being judged twice for the same crime . 

  There are two different problems , and we all know that in order to gain the confidence of patients , every doctor has to be seen to behave in an impeccable manner . 

  The medical profession is guarded by the confidence of its patients . " 

  " And in this case , " said Dr Barton , " you struck a man with such force that he was killed . " 

  " He slipped . 

  The court accepted that . " 

  " He died , and as a direct result of your intervention . " 

  For another hour the inquisition continued , almost , I felt , as though the " judges " were scraping for any dirt they could find . 

  One member asked for details of how my father had gone into voluntary liquidation . 

  On the other hand , one did try to come to my aid . 

  " Are not you the young man who spent some weeks with the research unit at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases ? " 

  " Yes sir , I did . " 

  " I thought I remembered your face , " he said . 

  " Why did you do this ? " asked Dr Barton . 

  I was able to explain my interest in helping with polio following Clare's illness . 

  " I see , " said Dr Barton . 

  " That will be all , thank you . 

  Will you wait in the ante-room while the governors discuss your case . " 

  I knew the answer before I was recalled twenty minutes later , and Dr Barton pronounced judgment . 

  " It is the considered opinion of the board of governors , " he said , " that in the interests of the good name of the medical profession , and " -- he gave a diplomatic cough -- " of St Andrew's , it would be much easier for all concerned if you were to resign . " 

  " And leave medicine ! " 

  I cried . 

  " Please moderate your voice , Doctor , " the chairman rebuked me . 

  " But , sir , " I begged . 

  " The only thing I want in life is to be a doctor . " 

  " You are a doctor , " he said . 

  " You are free to practise anywhere -- only not here . " 

  " It's grossly unfair , " I insisted . 

  " Why should I be penalised for helping someone in trouble ? 

  Is not it part of a doctor's work to help the sick ? " 

  " It is not part of a doctor's work to become involved in brawls , " he said firmly . 

  The verdict was delivered with such casual brutality that I flushed with the shame of it -- being kicked out like a clerk caught pinching pennies from the till . 

  I was about to shout those very words out when , for once in my impetuous life , Dr Barton prevented me , for as the other members of the board filed out , he said , " Doctor Masters . 

  Will you remain behind , please ? 

  I would like to talk to you for a minute or two . " 

  Sulkily , and seething inside , I remained . 

  " Now , sit in this chair next to me , " he said , and with a sudden change of tone and manner , said , " You must not blame us for keeping up such high standards of public behaviour . 

  And I want to help you if I can . " 

  Somewhat mollified , I remained silently waiting for him to talk . 

  What could he do -- what could anyone do -- when a doctor was blamed for something of which he was not guilty ? 

  " I know how you feel , " he said . 

  " But I was particularly interested in one thing : the interest you have shown in the treatment of polio . 

  And the extra-curricular work you did when you were a medical student . 

  Tell me , have you ever heard of a place called Koraloona ? " 

  Slightly bewildered , I said that I had not . 

  " I did not imagine you had . 

  It's a small island , barely twenty miles long , one of the seven South Sea islands in the Moto Varu archipelago . 

  Moto Varu , by the way , is Polynesian for seven islands . " 

  " But what has this to do with me ? " 

  I asked , still feeling bitter . 

  " There's a vacancy for an assistant doctor there . 

  Appointments are in the hands of the St Stephen Sisters of Mercy Mission which operates in the South Seas . " 

  He coughed . 

  " I happen to be chairman of the medical panel . " 

  I had never thought about the South Seas , beyond the instinctive yearning to escape the treadmill of an office desk , the clanking trams , the yellow fog , the rain . 

  And even now I really did not want to go . 

  I wanted to succeed in a normal way . 

  " There's one thing I have not told you . " 

  Dr Barton judged his words carefully . 

  " It's a beautiful place , a real tropical island , but it has a drawback . 

  It has regular outbreaks , for which we can find no reason , of one particular disease . 

  That disease is polio . " 

  My mouth must have dropped open . 

  " You see , Doctor Masters , " he continued , " we have been placed in a difficult position , but that is no reflection on your qualities as a good doctor . 

  And I became interested when I heard of your interest in polio . 

  In return for your resignation , I am offering you the opportunity to study a dreadful disease in a living laboratory . 

  You will never get another chance like it -- if you really mean what you say . " 

  " How would I -- well , get there ? 

  And when would I leave ? " 

  An inner excitement gripped me as I saw in my mind's eye an image of Clare trying to hobble round her bedroom . 

  " By ship to Australia , and then the authorities will arrange your passage by schooner to the islands . 

  I shall cable if you accept and you can sail in about a month . " 

  Normally a twice-monthly passenger and cargo ship , the Island Princess , sailed from Sydney to Tahiti , calling on the way at Sanderstown , the capital of the Moto Varu archipelago , and also on the return voyage to Australia . 

  From Sanderstown a local vessel would take me to Koraloona . 

  As it happened , I was given an alternative . 

  The Australian representative of the Mission , who drove me to the Southern Cross Hotel in Sydney , explained that the Mantela , a Sanderstown boat of 5,000 tons which normally plied between the islands , had just finished a refit in Sydney and was about to sail two days after my arrival . 

  I jumped at the opportunity of travelling on her . 

  I was fed up after weeks of playing deck quoits and shuffleboard , and the Mantela appeared to be the perfect introduction to the South Seas for , instead of going straight to Sanderstown , she would call at Rarotonga , and spend a day or two there , so I would be able to fit in a visit to another island and see something of it at a leisurely pace . 

  I knew nothing really about the behind-the-scenes activities of missions working in remote islands , but the Australian representative , Brian Parker , explained that he worked for several missions of different denominations , arranging facilities , transfer of funds , booking hotels for newcomers and whatever might be needed . 

  He was a short , precise man with a small moustache which reminded me a little of Hitler's , but he had none of the German leader's belligerence . 

  He could not do enough to help . 

  He laughed when I asked him if he was a clergyman . 

  " I am just a businessman , " he said . 

  " My experience of Christian missions has proved that they may be very good at saving souls , or bodies if they're medical missions , but for the most part they're not very good at business . 

  I just run local affairs for a dozen or so missions . " 

  " But is there much business to attend to ? " 

  " I am also in the import-export business . 

  But in answer to your question , yes . 

  For example , I've received a request from the doctor on Koraloona for a large parcel of drugs . 

  It's much easier for me to centralise all requests , arrange the shipping -- or , in this case , give them to you to take to the island . 

  You will like the Mantela . 

  You will be sailing under Captain Robins and you shall like him too . " 

  I did , from the moment we met , almost as soon as the first throb of the Mantela's engines announced that we were on our way . 

  Captain Robins was a Yorkshireman in his fifties who had long since lost his accent amidst the welter of a dozen dialects . 

  He was a tall man with a craggy , rubbery face which twisted and turned , often into a sardonic grin . 

  He had a mop of grey hair and , under it , steady grey eyes . 

  The Mantela , which had berths for six passengers in moderately comfortable cabins , boasted no luxuries like private bathrooms or toilets . 

  But the saloon , where we ate , as well as drank our aperitifs , was spick and span , and shone with the polished mahogany and brass of a house-proud owner . 

  She might not have been as glamorous as the great vessels loaded with equally glamorous cargo , but she was just as important in her own way . 

  Not especially gracious , but squat and workmanlike , plodding with tenacity from port to port . 

  The Mantela was an honest ship , with no frills , but ready to take on all comers . 

  Besides myself there were three other passengers , but they all disembarked at Rarotonga , and after that , for the three days at sea before we reached Koraloona , Robins and I were more or less on our own . 

  The first mate and the ship's engineer took their meals at different times , and did not use the saloon as a sitting-room . 

  Occasionally I would join Robins on the bridge ; at other times , when all was going well , he would come into the saloon to join me in a drink served by a Cockney steward called Tomkins ; the choice was limited , but I did not drink much anyway . 

  " Ever try this after dinner ? " 

  He pointed to a bottle of Crme de Menthe . 

  " Best after-dinner drink in the world , " he pronounced , " I call it Sticky Green . " 

  When I shook my head , he said , " I suppose it's not a young man's drink . 

  But it does wonders for dyspepsia . " 

  " An expensive kind of medicine , " I said . 

  " I can give you something that does not cost a quarter of that . " 

  " Mebbe , but do not forget I get my drinks duty free . " 

  After Tomkins had served the second glass , Robins looked at me almost quizzically , and said , " I've seen a few doctors come and go in the islands , but you do not seem to fit into the usual pattern . " 

  " Too young ? " 

  He searched for the word he wanted then said , with a grin , " Too posh ! " 

  " That I am not , " I laughed . 

  " No insult intended . 

  But you shall find your new boss , Alec Reid , a very different proposition . 

  He's a real character . 

  He certainly fits into Koraloona . 

  A made-to-measure Scotsman . " 

  " Not even posh ? " 

  " In one way , yes . " 

  He did not rise to my teasing . 

  " He's a good doctor , and he's in love with the island . 

  He will never leave it . " 

  " Is it that beautiful ? " 

  " You will see for yourself before long . 

  In the meantime , while I check on the bridge , read this , I brought it down from my cabin to show you . 

  It's the cheapest adventure story in the world , and it will tell you more about Koraloona than I can ever put into words . 

  I shall be back in an hour , then we will have a final Sticky Green . 

  What say ? " 

  Captain Robins left the saloon , I peeled a couple of the red bananas that grow wild on the islands -- my dessert -- and picked up the book . 

  It was a tattered copy of Sailing Directions . 

  KORALOONA , eighteen miles long , eleven miles wide , is one of the smaller islands in the Moto Varu ( Seven Islands ) archipelago , of which Sanders Island is the largest ( pop . 

  94,000 ) . 

  The capital is Sanderstown which contains a major British naval base . 

  Koraloona is 130 miles west of Sanders Island and is dangerous to shipping because it is encircled by a coral reef at times fifty miles long , marked on all Admiralty charts . 

  Two passages through the reef , both navigable for vessels up to 5,000 tons . 

  Main town of Koraloona is Anani . 

  Smaller town to east is Tala-Tala . 

  Several small villages , unnamed . 

  Regular vessels bring supplies from either Sanders Island or Apia , Pago Pago or Rarotonga . 

  Abundant water supplies , fruit , vegetables , staples , fish plentiful . 

  Note : The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty feel that pilots should advise would-be visitors that Koraloona has only one small hospital and one doctor . 

  In that respect their Lordships were wrong ; by the time the Mantela docked Koraloona would have gained , at the ripe old age of twenty-four years , four months and seven days , their first assistant medical officer . 

  There is something about the sea that invites the exchange of confidences . 

  You meet perfect strangers , listen politely to their life stories and then , when they cock an inquisitive ear , you need no encouragement to answer their unspoken questions . 

  On land it can take years for two people to become close friends , yet at sea the years are telescoped into hours . 

  Maybe the huge wilderness of the sea helps . 

  A man feels so insignificant against its vastness that confidences no longer seem something to keep to oneself . 

  And , of course , in most cases you know you never will meet again . 

  With Captain Bill Robins , though , it was rather different . 

  He told me that he called regularly at Koraloona , and that I probably would run across him from time to time . 

  In my case it was also different , for though I had done no criminal act I had by force of circumstance set sail for Koraloona to build a new life there . 

  True , Bill Robins had started the confidences . 

  Perhaps because he spent so much of his time alone , he told me all about his wife , his two children , the home they had bought in Sanderstown , how long he had been married , where the children went to school -- all the details of life in a town of about 60,000 people . 

  Especially on the second night , I had the feeling that he wanted to talk , and what made it the more interesting was the variety of his experiences and the mature way in which he alluded to them . 

  He was a man of books as well as of the sea , and knew his history as well as his geography . 

  Leaning forward in the rattan chair , on the after deck , he said , " I tell you , Doctor " -- he always addressed me thus , showing the respect of one professional man for another " in over thirty years at sea I've become a specialist in islands . 

  Funny lot , the people on " em . 

  There's the Andamans , where they never talk , just converse entirely in song -- a sort of chant . 

  It's like being in a permanent opera ! 

  And Zanzibar -- now there's a place . 

  That's where the Arabs prohibited the import of jasmine because the scent depresses the men and excites the women . 

  And once I spent three weeks on Thursday Island . 

  Lived on one of the world's most expensive delicacies -- turtle . 

  I never want to see turtle soup again as long as I live . " 

  " You've talked about several islands , " I said , " but there's one thing I cannot get straight . " 

  " What's that ? " 

  " My bearings . 

  The Moto Varu group . 

  How big are they ? 

  How far is one from the next ? " 

  " Come into my cabin and I shall show you . 

  The Mantela does not boast a chart room so we may be a bit cramped . " 

  His room was indeed tiny , all brass and mahogany , a bunk bed with a red blanket on it , a wash basin that folded away , a desk . 

  There was little else , except a small bookshelf from which he took one of several charts . 

  Spreading it on the desk , he showed where we were , steaming due north from Rarotonga . 

  " Of course , all the islands are volcanic in the sense that they've been thrown up from the depths by submarine upheavals thousands of years ago ; but only one of them's got a crater . 

  We will come to that in a minute . 

  First and most important is Sanders Island , to the east of Koraloona , " he explained , pointing . 

  " As you've read , the population is around sixty thousand in Sanderstown itself . 

  It's a city . 

  Flourishing . 

  Aided by the naval base , of course . 

  The island's got five towns as well as the capital . " 

  " And Koraloona's -- what ? 

  About a hundred miles to the west ? " 

  " Give or take a few sandbanks . 

  But I will not dwell on her . 

  You will learn all about the island in half an hour once you're there . " 

  He pointed again to the chart . 

  " Almost due north of Koraloona is Hodges Island , named after the painter who accompanied Captain Cook on his second voyage , then went on to paint India for Warren Hastings . 

  It's only thirty miles away , but there's no direct method of getting there because of the reef . 

  You've got to sail south , then half way round the reef . 

  As a result , nobody ever goes there . 

  Anyway , it consists of one enormous coconut plantation to make copra -- from which you get coconut oil . 

  It stretches for nearly fifty miles , and the entire population cultivates copra . 

  Stinks to high heaven . 

  I do not land there unless I have to . 

  The copra company has its own ship . " 

  He showed me a speck on the map to the left of Hodges and said that it was named Banks Island , after Cook's naturalist friend . 

  " There's already one Banks Island just north of Australia , but Cook must have liked him to name another after him . " 

  " And inside the huge lagoon of Koraloona ? " 

  " There you have an oddity . 

  It's called Penal Island , thirty miles from Koraloona . 

  A launch calls there regularly . 

  The name tells you everything . 

  It was founded , so to speak , as a sort of Devil's Island -- but not so tough : you cannot be tough in the South Seas . 

  But trouble-makers in the old days used to be left there until they died . 

  Always plenty to eat . 

  There are few prisoners that I know of , and a hundred people live there , including two or three who are official security guards . 

  Cushy job , if you ask me . " 

  " That's five . " 

  " Only two left , and they're simple . 

  High Island is not far away , inside the lagoon to the west of Koraloona , and is uninhabited . 

  That's the dormant volcano . 

  Low Island -- thirty or forty miles long and near High Island -- is the richest . 

  Centuries ago the birds themselves chose Low Island as a sanctuary and the droppings over the years made it rich in guano -- a fertiliser . 

  Ten years ago a New Zealand company was given a licence to dig it out . 

  The five hundred locals who live there are better off than any of us , because they get a percentage of the profits . " 

  His rubbery face twisted into an unpleasant sniff , as he added , " I would not recommend it for a honeymoon . 

  The smell is terrible . 

  I've only been once . 

  Never again . " 

  " But that , I take it , does not apply to Koraloona ? " 

  I was laughing , but I sensed his sudden excitement . 

  " You will find it's like Paradise , or the Garden of Eden , " he said . 

  " As though it's just been created and has not had a chance to get fouled up with so-called " civilisation " . 

  I've read my Homer in my time , as no doubt you have , Doctor . 

  And I always remember the Lotus-land in The Odyssey where everybody lives in ease and luxury -- though not the luxury we Europeans think of as such . 

  That's just material . 

  The luxury in Koraloona is of contentment . " 

  He paused and leaned forward again . 

  " It's something to do with metabolism -- eh ? " 

  I doubted it . 

  I expected the Polynesians there to be just as subject to the ailments of the flesh as anywhere else in the world -- especially polio -- otherwise what would they need a doctor for ? 

  But I knew what Robins meant . 

  Somehow time , which in the Europe I had left was always being talked about as " of the essence " , seemed of no account in this part of the world . 

  One remark he made puzzled me . 

  " Why did you say I was too posh ? " 

  I asked . 

  " Did I ? 

  Must have slipped out . 

  When I was a kid , in Hull , my father and mother took me to Hessle to have tea with his boss , and I remember Mother telling me that she had stayed up half the night making me a new sailor suit and saying , " Behave yourself , Bill . 

  Remember these are posh people . " " 

  " And did you behave ? " 

  " Almost , " he grinned . 

  " But Mother went scarlet when the boss's wife told me what a nice suit I was wearing , and I told her that Mother had spent nearly all night making it . " 

  It was very quiet that evening , the steady rhythm of the ship's engines interrupted only by the occasional guttural cry *om the deck above . 

  The sea was flat , faintly streaked by a waning moon , and through the porthole of the saloon I could see the Southern Cross and the Milky Way , unblemished by cloud . 

  The peace and tranquillity of the moment stirred all kinds of memories . 

  I was thinking of Robins' house and then my own before I left home ; his mother making a sailor suit , my mother forever -- in retrospect , anyway -- making patchwork quilts . 

  I suppose that at that moment , the night before I stepped ashore to build a new life , it was time to say goodbye to the old . 

  Robins interrupted my thoughts by saying , " Sorry about the word " posh " , but I'd heard before we left Sanderstown the last time that a young man had been appointed assistant to Doctor Reid , and I was a bit surprised when I met you . 

  My first impression was that you'd be more at home putting up a brass plate in Harley Street . " 

  " That was exactly what I did intend to do . 

  You must have a sixth sense , " I said . 

  " But plans have a habit of coming unstuck . " 

  It did not take long to tell him my story . 

  I spared no details -- there was no good reason why I should . 

  It was not criminal to be impulsive ; only foolish . 

  " Not always foolish , " he challenged me . 

  " It is not foolish to be right , is it ? " 

  I said nothing . 

  After all , I was only twenty-four and Captain Robins was in his fifties . 

  And though I did hold passionate beliefs , I was a bit young to express them all . 

  " We were talking about reading Homer , " he went on . 

  " I remember one line from the Iliad , " One principle is for the best , to fight in defence of one's country " . 

  That's what you were doing . " 

  His rubbery face twisted into its familiar grin , " Fighting fascism . 

  Maybe it caused you a few problems , but you might be about to get your reward in heaven . 

  No , I do not think you're going to die yet , rather a paradise on earth . " 

  " I shall drink to that , " I laughed . 

  " Yes , even half a glass of Sticky Green . " 

  " Talking of fascists " -- Robins made sure his pipe was drawing well -- " are they going to drag us into a war ? " 

  " I hope not . 

  But it was touch and go at Munich . 

  I am no expert , but what worries me is that , when you're dealing with madmen , they increase their demands at the slightest sign of weakness . " 

  " No war would ever reach this part of the world , " said Robins , " but I remember the last in Europe . 

  And I still have relatives living in Hull . 

  It would not be fun being there , with zeppelins or whatever . " 

  Again I wondered at myself , only just into my twenties , debating the world with a man old enough to be my father . 

  " It may never come . " 

  " I shall drink to that ! " 

  It was Robins' turn to laugh . 

  " Just one final nightcap before I turn in . " 

  That was the last night . 

  The following day , shortly after lunch , we sighted Koraloona on the horizon . 

  At first all I could see was the hazy black outline of a jagged peak , little more than a shadow on the pallor of a dead calm sea , and then , as the air shimmered and danced and drew nearer , I could make out colours , mostly green . 

  Finally I saw shapes of valleys , hills , crags , the white flash of waterfalls and then after Bill Robins lent me his binoculars , even houses , mostly thatched with palms or with roofs of red corrugated iron , the trademark of Polynesia , with the occasional roof of startling white . 

  " Coral , " explained Robins . 

  " Usually European . 

  They're expensive but they collect pure rainfall , because coral never gets dirty . " 

  Within a couple of hours the silence that had wrapped the sea in peace was changed for a distant roar-like thunder . 

  " The reef , " Robins explained . 

  " We will be okay as soon as we're through the passage . " 

  When we actually reached the reef , with calm water erupting into foaming waves twenty feet high as they hit the rocks , the Mantela bucked like a frightened horse , sank into a trough , reared up again , and then , as suddenly as it had started , the old tub was through the creamy foam of the passage and had settled into the lazy waters of the lagoon . 

  The island was spread in front of me , outrigger canoes paddling towards us from the silver beaches lined with tall , bending palm trees and feathery casuarinas , while , behind , the green volcanic mountains rose until they seemed to meet the sky . 

  In the distance I could see two flagstaffs , one with the Union Jack fluttering , the other with the blue flag and stars of New Zealand . 

  As we approached the ramshackle pier the Mantela stopped her engines , waited , then , as though changing gear , trembled into a slow approach . 

  The crew threw out the lines , and those on the pier pulled the heavy ropes attached to them and made fast . 

  I looked out and saw for the first time the main street of Koraloona's largest town , Anani : a dusty white strip of road , a long row of assorted shops , a few cars . 

  One man was carrying a huge bunch of red bananas over one shoulder , another was driving a small open truck loaded with oranges . 

  At the far end of the beach a dozen kids were running and splashing into the blue water without a care in the world . 

  All except one , who hobbled after them , hampered by the club foot that is the hallmark of polio . 

  Apart from that one pitiful figure , the scene looked idyllic . 

  I hoped it would live up to its promise . 

  As the gangplank of the Mantela was lowered , an extraordinary-looking man climbed on board . 

  He wore a topee , the original colour of which was uncertain , it was so battered and stained with sweat ; a bright red shirt ; and a pair of khaki shorts held up with an old red and orange tie . 

  Even I recognised it as being the flamboyant colours of the Marylebone Cricket Club . 

  No socks covered his hairy legs , while on his feet he wore only sandals . 

  He looked to be in his early-to-mid-fifties , and was running to fat , and when he took off his topee it was to wipe the sweat from a pink , bald head . 

  I had not the faintest idea who he was , but he looked jolly . 

  Without hesitation he approached me , held out a hand , smiled and said with a touch of humour , " Doctor Masters , I presume ? " 

  I smiled in assent . 

  " I am Doctor Reid . 

  I wanted to be the first to welcome my new assistant to this benighted spot . " 

  " Benighted ! " 

  Dr Reid wiped his sweating head . 

  " I am known for my feeble sense of humour , " he laughed . 

  " I shouldn'a make jokes like that . 

  I've put up with the place for nearly twenty years . " 

  Between shouts to the dock hands unloading my trunks he asked , " You've got the drugs I cabled for ? " 

  I nodded . 

  They had been my constant care since Mr Parker had handed them to me . 

  As we walked on to the jetty , I was watching carefully to make sure none of my trunks was left on board . 

  " We've got you a wee bungalow , " said Dr Reid , adding with a touch of pride , " Two bedrooms . " 

  I soon learned that in the islands a bungalow meant any house , large or small . 

  " But it might be better to spend a couple of nights with Mollie first . " 

  " Mollie ? " 

  Laughing from the depths of his shaking frame , he explained , " Mollie Green . 

  But do not get any ideas . 

  Mollie's nae for bedding . 

  She keeps Green's Hotel -- famous all over the Pacific . 

  People who've never even been within a thousand miles of Koraloona have heard of Mollie Green's place . " 

  He looked at my mountain of luggage . 

  " How much of your clobber will you need for your first two days ? " 

  " This'll do . " 

  I pointed to two suitcases . 

  " Right then . 

  I shall send the rest to the bungalow , and when you've rested you can explore the town and , " with a sly chuckle , " go on a shopping spree . " 

  I laughed politely , my mind mainly concerned with making sure that I would find all my belongings . 

  The islanders in their shorts or sarongs did not look " professional " . 

  The jetty was large but needed a lick of paint and its wooden supports were green with sea slime ; it also lacked ( to my inexperienced eye ) any sense of efficiency . 

  And the heat of the day , combined with a natural anxiety , made me sweat , though not as profusely as Dr Reid , who was continually wiping his pink , bald head . 

  It was true that the happy-go-lucky dockers , working for a few pennies every time a ship came in , were being watched carefully by Captain Robins on the bridge , but it all seemed rather haphazard , as though I would be lucky if I ever found all my trunks . 

  I assumed they would all have been stowed in one corner of the hold and would reappear at the same time . 

  It was something of a shock to see one Polynesian , his face a wide grin , trot down the gangplank carrying a sack of flour on his head and one of my suitcases in his right hand . 

  On the other hand he did , once on the jetty , bend his knees carefully so that he could deposit my suitcase next to another item of my luggage before loping off somewhere else with the sack still on his head . 

  " Do not worry , " Dr Reid assured me . 

  " They've got enough method in their madness . 

  Ah ! " 

  He spotted one crate . 

  " Yon'll be the drugs ? " 

  He indicated a large parcel and , as I nodded , said , " I shall send them straight round to the dispensary . " 

  He gave orders in what I took to be the local dialect . 

  I knew I would have to learn it quickly though , since Koraloona was connected with the Cook archipelago , most people spoke English . 

  " Should not I keep the drugs ? " 

  I asked . 

  " In case they get lost or into the wrong hands ? 

  I could bring them round to you later . " 

  " Do not worry , " said Dr Reid . 

  " Nothing gets lost here . 

  And everybody knows everything . 

  They know all about you , where you're going to live . 

  And I've already fixed up a local lass to come and clean up for you every day . " 

  At that moment Captain Robins , who had been busy shouting orders , hailed Reid . 

  " Afternoon , Doc . 

  How's things ? " 

  " Fine , " cried Reid . 

  " You staying at Green's for the night ? " 

  When Robins nodded , Reid added to me , " Bill Robins is one of the best . 

  I am glad you will not be on your own for the first night . 

  I shall walk you to the hotel and show you round the hospital tomorrow . " 

  I thanked him , and soon we were making our way along Anani's main street , from which lanes led to the houses in the foothills behind . 

  What struck me immediately was the extraordinary background silence . 

  Cries , laughter , all those , yes . 

  But few motor cars , no big city life : instead , an almost uncanny , disconcerting stillness , the only constant sound the distant boom of waves on the reef . 

  And was there -- I could not be sure -- a lilt of the Hawaiian music we used to listen to at Oxford , mingling with the waves ? 

  The biggest -- and busiest -- building was the ship's chandler opposite the pier . 

  " Jim Wilson runs the place , " said Reid . 

  " Used to be an engineer in the RFC in the war , so he not only keeps the ship's stores , but knows everything about motor cars -- and ma plane . " 

  " Captain Robins told me you flew a plane . " 

  " An old Gloster , " Reid said . 

  " She was once owned by a flying school , so she has dual controls . 

  The flying school went bust . 

  She's an ancient lass , I call her Nellie , but she can take me all the way to Sanderstown if I want a night out with bright lights . 

  She takes off from a field behind the hospital . 

  I had her shipped out from England as deck cargo . " 

  Not far from the ship's chandler was Mick's Bar , a local pub with green shutters and heavily protected doors . 

  " They're needed sometimes . " 

  Reid saw me looking at the iron bars . 

  " There's some wild evenings there when the ships stay overnight . 

  It's about the only crime we get here . " 

  He pointed to the next building . 

  " Our local cinema . 

  It's open every Friday . " 

  A tattered bill advertised Tom Mix . 

  " And this is the general store . 

  Come in for a moment and meet Mr and Mrs Johnson . 

  They run the store . 

  They've even got a telephone so you can open an account now , then phone each time you run out of anything . " 

  " Come on in , and park your bag by the door . " 

  Reid put my other bag there and said , " Nice day , Mrs Johnson . " 

  Mrs Johnson was a cheerful woman of enormous energy who was bustling around the shop , despite a pair of huge , heavy breasts which bulged beneath her dress . 

  She was a local Polynesian girl , duskier than most , perhaps with a touch of true Samoan blood . 

  Sitting on a rocking chair in an office at the back , smoking and sipping beer , was a weedy little man with decaying teeth , glimpses of gold fillings , heavily tattooed arms and a cigarette drooping permanently from a weak mouth . 

  That was Mr Johnson . 

  He had a shifty air -- as well as an obvious aversion to work of any kind -- and I did not really take to him . 

  But he was polite enough , and got up to greet me . 

  His " office " was separated from the main store by a glass partition , and included a fridge with some glasses on top , and an ancient desk . 

  " Morning , Doc , " he cried . 

  " This your new assistant ? 

  Pleased to meet you , I am sure . " 

  He spoke with a Cockney accent and dropped aitches , oddly out of place on this paradise with its lilting voices that matched the gently waving palms . 

  As we looked around the store , Reid explained to me , " Johnson worked on a pearling lugger , stashed a bit of money away , looked around for the healthiest woman on the island , married her and set up shop . 

  He's never done a stroke of work since . " 

  " Bit rough on her . " 

  I watched her expertly snip off a length of trade cotton , then almost run to a shelf and move a fifty-pound sack of flour . 

  " Not on your life , " chuckled Reid . 

  " She's never had it so good . 

  She's aye the envy of every other girl on the island . 

  Overworked ? 

  She's even got a girl to help . " 

  Johnson's , I was soon to learn , was typical of other South Seas stores -- more like a warehouse than a shop , with new lines that had just arrived by boat piled up against the shelves of the barn-like building . 

  They seemed to sell everything from bolts of brightly coloured , imported cloth for making sarongs or Mother Hubbards -- the island dress that hangs in a straight line from shoulder to ankle -- to penknives and a large assortment of tools ranging from chisels to axes , from fishing lines and hooks to pots and pans . 

  There were also large stocks of that old standby of the islands in the rainy season , primus stoves and tins of paraffin , even oilskins , repair outfits , and copper tubing . 

  The prices seemed more or less the same as those in London at the time I'd left -- a box of matches or a bar of Cadbury's chocolate cost a penny . 

  I saw Colman's mustard at twopence a tin . 

  In one corner a modest selection of Penguin books cost 6d each , and nearby were cigarettes at the same price -- a tanner for a packet of ten . 

  The range of everyday articles on the shelves reminded me abruptly of things at home , and I found myself thinking of my last night before leaving London . 

  I spent those final few hours extravagantly , staying the night at the Strand Palace Hotel for ten shillings for bed , bathroom and a cooked breakfast thrown in , with sixpence extra for a haircut at the hotel barber shop -- three times as much as the Underground fare of twopence from Paddington to Trafalgar Square , where a Nippy served me at Lyons' Corner House with a sirloin steak for a shilling . 

  Sitting in his office , Mr Johnson offered us both cold beers from a pail of water in which a few pieces of ice floated . 

  We sipped them gratefully , but I must have been miles away , for Mr Johnson said , " Daydreaming , eh ? " 

  As I said a smiling " Sorry " , he asked , " Is there going to be a war in Europe , do you think ? " 

  He was the second man in two days to ask me that . 

  " It does not look too good , Mr Johnson , " I said . 

  " After Munich I thought we'd saved the day . 

  But now it's all bubbling up again . " 

  " Well , it will not affect us . " 

  Johnson lit himself a fresh cigarette from the butt end of the one he was smoking . 

  " But it's a terrible thing if it comes . 

  Blimey , that feller Hitler must be crazy . " 

  " All political figures are mad , " said Reid as he joined us on the veranda . 

  And after we left and were walking into the street , he asked , " Do you think there'll be a war ? " 

  " Yes , I do , " I sighed . 

  " There's no way of stopping Hitler short of fighting him . 

  If we do not , he will overrun all Europe -- probably England too . " 

  " You wouldna want to go back ? " asked Reid . 

  " No . " 

  I shook my head . 

  " I will not deny that if I were in London and war broke out I'd probably join up . 

  But I've signed on as medical assistant with you . 

  And somebody has to cure the sick here as well . " 

  " Well , you may lairn there's more to cure on the island than ye bargained for . " 

  I waited for him to go on , but Reid said nothing more and it left a moment of awkward silence between us . 

  In Main Street a healthy , smiling young man was striding by , effortlessly carrying , as though he hardly noticed it , two baskets of fruit , suspended at each tip of a bending bamboo arched across a shoulder . 

  You could see his muscles ripple , for he was dressed only in a lava-lava , the traditional kind of Polynesian loin cloth . 

  He must have come from the country for the lava-lava was rarely seen in the towns , however small . 

  He cried , " Morning , Doc . " 

  So did two or three naked kids playing on the strip of beach . 

  Dr Reid gave them all a wave . 

  The man with the baskets tried to kick a couple of scrawny hens out of his path and they fluttered towards the edge of the road . 

  A dog lay down by the side of the building , its pink tongue lolling out with thirst . 

  My medical eye noticed two things immediately : there were virtually no flies near the children playing on the beach ; and the dog lying down was no scrawny , starving mongrel . 

  It was well fed . 

  A couple of elderly men walked past with the slow tread of dignified bishops , their naked footfalls almost silent on the hot dust of the road . 

  " Well , ye've seen the Harrods of Koraloona , " said Reid , nodding back in the direction of Johnson's . 

  " Let us take a look at the rest of Main Street . " 

  The side of the dusty street facing the sea was lined with houses all the way along from the pier , but it was difficult to know exactly why many of them were there . 

  It had only taken a glance to recognise the ship's chandler , the site corroborated by the smell of tarred rope ; the same with Mick's Bar and Johnson's store . 

  A little further on there was a sign " Lee Chong Hairdresser " and underneath the surprising information , " Ears also pierced " . 

  Near it was a more imposing building with a sign proclaiming " Pacific Island Steam Packet Company " and in smaller letters , " Koraloona Branch Office . 

  Manager , David Truefitt " . 

  A pink-washed , one-storey , stone building nestled near to it , looking strangely out of place ; it was a prettified building , which might have been transplanted from the South of France . 

  I was not surprised when Alec Reid told me , " It was built by a woman artist from New Zealand . 

  It was her idea to come here each summer , but she has not been for three years now . 

  She was of a certain age , so mebbe her painting days are over . 

  It's used now by Mr and Mrs Gilbert . 

  They're from the UK . 

  Retired . 

  Ye'll meet them . " 

  " It's a bit odd to live in Main Street , " I said . 

  " I'd have thought that , behind -- " I waved a hand towards the beginning of the volcanic hills . 

  " Aye , that's where all the nicest bungalows are . 

  Behind Main Street . 

  More space . 

  Coconut groves and lots of flowers . 

  That's where ye'll be living -- near our hospital behind Hill Street which runs parallel to Main Street , but a wee bit up the hillside . " 

  Occasionally a space divided two buildings and then I caught a glimpse of attap huts , children playing , chickens scratching in the dust , pigs rooting , the vivid red of a flame tree , coconut and breadfruit trees , more what I expected than the pink-washed " retirement bungalow " . 

  Next to it as we walked towards the end of the street was a two-storey white building , freshly painted , though the old sign was weathered , " New Zealand Government . 

  Cook Island Land Office " . 

  " Land ? " 

  I asked . 

  " Is it expensive ? " 

  " Get along with ye ! " replied Alec . 

  " Nobody buys land in Koraloona . 

  Ye take what ye like as long as nobody else lives on it or uses it . " 

  I must have looked puzzled for Alex went on , " Ye probably know that the Moto Varu archipelago is a Cook Island dependency . " 

  But , he explained , it was only a paternal relationship . 

  Sanders Island was virtually independent and so were the other islands of the archipelago , providing they behaved themselves . 

  Reid was convinced that the British Empire had given New Zealand the Cook Islands mandate because the Americans wanted it for their sphere of influence . 

  " So we kept it in the family , " he said . 

  " And this is their office ? " 

  I asked . 

  " Aye , but there's nae any real work to be done . 

  They have a staff of three to help administer Koraloona . 

  Ye'll be meeting Colonel Fawcett , ex-Royal Engineers , who's the head man , and his two assistants , Bill Shanks who runs the radio link , and Jack Haslam , general factotum and the -- best tennis player on the island . 

  They all live in the houses dotted on the hillside above Main Street . " 

  We had by now almost reached the end of Main Street , where a group of girls was washing laundry in a stone trough under the shade of two huge , ancient mango trees . 

  They looked up , saw us and , waving to Reid , cried , " Good morning , Doc ! " 

  " Better be polite to them , " advised Reid . 

  " They will be washing your smalls as soon as you settle in . 

  Hulloa ladies ! " he returned their greeting . 

  Taking off his topee , he wiped his head , looking almost comical in his shorts and sandals , but obviously all the Polynesians knew and liked him . 

  There was a great deal of giggling and whispering as we passed by , and then Reid said , " At last ! 

  Here's Green's Hotel . " 

  At first sight the outside of the hotel resembled a third-rate boarding house in a British resort ; three storeys the white paint flaking off the walls and window sills . 

  I must have looked crestfallen , for Reid said at once , " It's the heart of a person that counts , Laddie , not the clothes they wear . 

  Same with here . 

  And Green's has got a bathroom on every floor'-- as if that settled it . 

  It was certainly taller than the other buildings in Anani's main street and , despite its shabby exterior , I could sense the air of warmth and welcome the moment I passed through the front door . 

  The reception room was little more than a hall . 

  Behind the small veneered wooden counter a dozen or so keys dangled from hooks on a numbered board , together with a few dog-eared official-looking proclamations . 

  On the counter itself was a bell , the old brass kind on which one banged a button . 

  By the side of a registration book stood a tray on which rested a bottle of Scotch and four small glasses . 

  As Reid and I put down the cases we were carrying , Reid uncorked the bottle and offered me a shot of whisky . 

  " Custom of the house , " he explained . 

  " A free drink for the weary traveller . " 

  Downing his tot in one go , he smacked his lips and said , " Come on , Laddie , a thimbleful will not hurt you . 

  And it always tastes better when you dinna have to pay . " 

  I nodded , and at that moment , as I downed my drink , gasping as the fiery liquid burned my throat , a large woman in her late forties emerged from the office behind . 

  " Morning , Doc , " she said to Alec Reid . 

  Turning to me she smiled and said , " I am Mollie Green . 

  And you must be Doctor Masters . 

  My pleasure . " 

  She held out a podgy hand . 

  She had a twang that at first I did not recognise ; it was New Zealand , for though her mother had been local , the late Mr Green , her father , came from Auckland , and had lived there before opening Green's Hotel . 

  However , it was not until she came round from behind the reception desk that I realised how huge she was . 

  " Come on , sit down and let us all have a beer , " she said , and with a look at Dr Reid added , " It's better for you than that rotgut at the bar . " 

  She banged on the bell and shouted , " Lee Ho , two large beers and three glasses . " 

  A Chinese , wearing none-too-clean ducks and a singlet , appeared with a tray bearing our drinks . 

  A moment later , as he set them down , Mollie patted a chair and said , " Come on , take the weight off your feet , Doctor Masters . " 

  She was not gross in any disgusting way , though she had to sit down carefully , for it was a tight fit for her to squeeze into the chair with its wooden arms . 

  She was just cheerfully fat , her obesity partly disguised by the fact that she , too , wore a Mother Hubbard . 

  Two other factors detracted *om her massive size : her agreeable , welcoming smile , and her extraordinary absence of wrinkles . 

  She wore no make-up , so that her fatness was disguised by her warmth of character . 

  " I shall show you your room if you like , " she offered . 

  " But there's no need really . 

  Lee Ho will take up your bags . 

  The room's clean and tidy and there's only one other guest -- Captain Robins . 

  You will have met him , of course . 

  He usually stays the night here when the Mantela comes in . 

  Likes a change from his cabin . 

  But do not worry : I've put him on a separate floor . " 

  I must have looked puzzled . 

  " You're the only two guests , so if you're on separate floors it means you've each got your own bathroom . 

  He will be coming in when the deck cargo's cleared . 

  You will be staying to dinner . 

  Eight sharp . " 

  Mollie was not asking a question , more making a statement , knowing there was nowhere else to eat until I settled in my own home . 

  " Lobsters do you ? " 

  " Lobsters ! " 

  I had visions of London prices . 

  " All meals included in the tariff , " said Mollie , grinning . 

  " And dinna get fashed , " said Dr Reid . 

  " Lobsters are two a penny here . 

  The boys spear them on the reef . 

  When you've been here six months you shall nae want to see another lobster in your life . " 

  " You do not know how to cook them , " Mollie Green sniffed . 

  " We have dozens of ways of making lobsters taste different . " 

  After a second beer , Dr Reid prepared to leave , explaining that he was going to the dispensary . 

  " When does surgery open ? " 

  I asked as we stood outside the front door of Green's Hotel . 

  " When I feel like it , " he retorted . 

  " Or in future I am hoping that on three days a week when ye feel like it . " 

  He had half turned to walk to his car , which he had left down by the jetty , when we heard the sound of a horn , pressed just once -- not to warn us against danger but to attract our attention . 

  I turned round and saw an old Austin Ten slowly approaching us . 

  It braked as it drew abreast . 

  In the driving seat was a woman in her late thirties perhaps , white , but with the almost stern aquiline features of someone with a trace of Polynesian blood . 

  I smiled a polite greeting , but the woman hardly acknowledged me . 

  Dr Reid turned to her and said almost formally , " Good morning , Tiare . 

  May I present my newly appointed assistant , Doctor Masters ? 

  Princess Tiare . " 

  She did not shake hands -- it would have been difficult for her , anyway , sitting in the car -- but as I pondered on the word " princess " and bowed slightly , she said , " So you are Doctor Masters ? 

  How old are you ? " 

  " Twenty-four . 

  Not too young ? " 

  I smiled , and taking my cue from Reid added : " I hope I can be of service to Koraloona , Princess . " 

  " Thank you , " she smiled back , yet retaining a slight sense of reserve or dignity . 

  " It's wonderful to be here , " I said , making conversation . 

  " I was surprised that you came on the Mantela . " 

  I could see her looking at the vessel by the jetty . 

  " I thought you'd have taken the regular boat to Sanderstown and spent a night or two there . " 

  I explained how by chance the Mantela had been in Sydney for a refit . 

  " And I enjoyed every minute of the trip , " I said with genuine enthusiasm . 

  " We all love the Mantela , " she agreed . 

  " She's part of our lives . 

  My daughter Aleena travels on her regularly . 

  She goes to boarding school in Sanderstown , but , " with a smile , " always seems to be coming home for the holidays . 

  You must come round with Doctor Reid for a drink at our home , " she said , again with that slight formality . 

  " I'd love to , thank you , Princess , " I replied equally formally . 

  Turning to Dr Reid , she asked , " Are you going to the cinema on Friday ? " 

  " Aye -- unless a new bairn arrives to spoil my weekly fun , " he replied . 

  " Are any expected ? " 

  She did not ask the question idly , but with the authority of one who expected to be kept informed of everything happening on the island . 

  " There's three on the way , " Reid told her . 

  " But I hope not for two weeks -- and then with any luck not on a Friday , or I may have to ask Doctor Masters to deputise for me . " 

  The " Princess " then asked to be told the names of the three expectant mothers . 

  When these were given her she nodded and said , " Of course . 

  I remember now . 

  I shall go and visit them . 

  Good morning to both of you doctors . " 

  With that she slammed the old Austin into gear , then almost as quickly put it back into neutral . 

  " Aleena's got a bit of a cough , " she said . 

  " Have you any linctus ? " 

  " You will have some medicine in an hour or so , " Reid promised . 

  " Thank you . " 

  As the old car started up again , I asked him , " How old is Aleena , the daughter ? " 

  " She's a thirteen-year-old . 

  Lovely kid . 

  Ask Captain Robins about her this evening . 

  He will explain how one day she will not only be a princess -- but an heiress too . 

  Worth a hundred thousand pounds . 

  A bonny sum , " he mused . 

  " You're joking , " I said . 

  But I could see he was perfectly serious . 

  I thought of the pearl fishers who often visited the South Sea Islands , and of the many who had made fortunes . 

  " Not pearls ! " cried Reid , reading my mind . 

  " Aye , there are pearls in these waters -- enough for a king's ransom . 

  But I doubt if they will ever be fished . 

  If we started that we'd spoil the island . " 

  " Well , then -- what ? " 

  " Why do not you come and join me for dinner tomorrow evening , and I shall tell you then . " 

  " I'd love to . 

  Thanks . " 

  After Reid left I went to my room . 

  It was a clean , white , rather clinical-looking room , with its white wooden towel rail , its bowl and pitcher of water for those who did not have the time or inclination to take a bath . 

  And I noticed that in the wardrobe was a spare pillow . 

  Good -- I liked two . 

  I put away the few clothes I had brought , together with photos of Mother and Father , and another one -- a head and shoulders portrait of Clare , looking happy and unconcerned about her legs . 

  I had a couple of books which I had slipped into my light case -- Somerset Maugham's novel The Moon and Sixpence , which I was looking forward to reading again because it was , of course , based on the life of the painter Gauguin , who'd lived here in the South Seas ; and a collection of Guy de Maupassant stories , in English . 

  It suddenly occurred to me that I had been so busy enjoying myself on the Mantela that I had never even opened either of them . 

  Only one thing worried me -- my trunks , particularly the one containing all my own medical " supplies " . 

  I did not like the idea of leaving them unattended overnight . 

  Supposing someone pinched them -- where would I be ? 

  To a young doctor like myself , these were my " valuables " -- the Zeiss Ikon microscope in the scuffed leather case , its precious lenses protected from dust by silk covers ; the glass-lidded box of stainless-steel instruments -- retractors , forceps , hooks , scissors and needles ; my much-thumbed copy of that heavy-going but essential tome , Gray's Anatomy ; manuals of pharmacology and pharmacy ; Belding's Textbook of Clinical Parasitology and Strong's Prevention and Treatment of Tropical Diseases , both of which I'd bought at the last minute in the hope that the young man in John Bell &amp;amp; Croyden in Wigmore Street was right when he assured me that they provided " the answers to all tropical problems " ; and some bound volumes of the British Medical Journal which I had picked up cheap in Charing Cross Road . 

  I decided to return to the jetty and see if I could store them overnight . 

  Perhaps Mrs Johnson could take them in ? 

  I went out into Main Street and started off for the pier . 

  Two fishing boats were approaching the small harbour , and at the far end of Main Street I could see the bulk of the Mantela . 

  Then I saw the spare figure of Captain Robins walking towards me , bag in hand : even on land after such a short voyage he had the kind of rolling gait that proclaimed him a man of the sea . 

  " I was on my way to see about my trunks , " I started . 

  " Do not worry , " he replied . 

  " Jim Wilson , the ship's chandler , is storing them for you until you get settled . " 

  " Thank God -- that's a relief , " I thanked him . 

  " I saw you meeting your new boss , " he smiled . 

  " You will get on with him fine . 

  Why not let us go back to the hotel ? " 

  " Suits me . " 

  I was eager to talk , especially after the intriguing encounter with the Princess . 

  We walked back together , and once in the hall of the hotel Robins dumped his small bag , shouted , " Mollie ! " and at once drained a small glass of her whisky . 

  " I do not really know much about Doctor Reid , " I admitted , " except that he seems to have a great sense of humour and is -- well , perhaps a bit unconventional . " 

  " He's one of the best . 

  But I shall not bore you with second-hand accounts of the way he lives . 

  He will soon tell you himself . 

  He loves it . 

  You going to have dinner with him tonight ? " 

  I shook my head . 

  " Tomorrow . " 

  " Fine . 

  You and I shall have dinner together then . 

  But how's about a drive round the island -- just so that you can see for yourself what it's like . " 

  " What about a car ? " 

  " Mollie will lend me hers . " 

  At that moment Mollie Green appeared , and both took it for granted that Robins could borrow the car . 

  Her only admonition was , " Do not be late for supper . " 

  Robins duly promised , and a moment later we were on our way in Mollie's Ford 8 . 

  There was nothing more to see in Main Street except the eternal fascination of boats bobbing in water as we set off past the ship's chandler -- and behind , as casually as an oak or a beech tree in England , dozens of the orange trees which had given the town of Anani its name . 

  " Next stop Tala-Tala ! " 

  Robins gave his rubbery lop-sided grin and added sardonically , " If you can call it a town , despite its double-barrelled name . 

  At least it had a church there before they built one in Anani . 

  If I am in port on a Sunday I always go to church at Tala-Tala . " 

  " You do not strike me as a religious man , " I said frankly . 

  " I am not . 

  But I love singing hymns , and the organist is better at Tala-Tala . 

  Going to church is the only chance I get of singing -- well , with accompaniment anyway . " 

  Tala-Tala , he explained , five miles up the road , had the first church on Koraloona because it was built by the first missionaries to arrive on the island . 

  They landed there , and the locals named it " Tala-Tala " -- the Polynesian name for " preacher " . 

  It was very pretty , in a picture-postcard way . 

  Coconuts grew almost to the edge of the silver strip of coral beach , which sparkled in the hot sun . 

  Naked children splashed gleefully in the shallow water , trying to catch the occasional sand crab before it scuttled underground . 

  A few scrawny chickens were busy searching for scraps , while half a dozen black pigs grunted among the roots of hedges of sago , or round the slim pawpaw trees bending under the weight of their fruit . 

  The thatched houses often consisted only of a roof of pandanus or coconut leaves on four poles , with rolled-up slats of interwoven pandanus leaves which could be lowered in case of rain . 

  Tala-Tala even had its own home-made harbour , a kind of inner lagoon in the outer lagoon , obviously a laboriously built , three-sided breakwater , in which I assumed that every stone must have been carried by hand or on rollers to afford protection for the boats it enclosed . 

  For Tala-Tala was the centre of the local fishing " industry " , and its gaily painted boats searched for big fish like marlin outside the reef . 

  When I told Robins of the effort it must have required to transport the heavy materials by hand he just laughed . 

  " No , it was not that way at all . 

  The New Zealand government transported the rocks by sea and helped to build the breakwater so that the island could start a fishing business . 

  You see , an island like Hodges is so occupied with copra that it produces nothing else . 

  Tala-Tala supplies it with fresh fish -- that is , when the chaps feel like fishing . " 

  In the centre of the tiny harbour lay a sleek white pleasure yacht with , as I could see , one or two white officers in peaked caps and white shorts and shirts standing on the decks . 

  " Looks a bit out of place , " I said with a smile . 

  " I shall tell you about that lot in a couple of minutes , but I just want to catch our fisherman and be sure we have enough fresh fish for the Mantela's homeward trip . " 

  By the time he returned , half a dozen island girls had sauntered past , and their perfume hung in the still air . 

  " It's like going into the scent counter at Harrods , " I said . 

  " Frangipani , " explained Robins . 

  " Nothing like so sophisticated as Harrods . 

  The girls just pick the flowers and twist them into the circlets they put on their heads . 

  The perfume lasts all day . 

  Let us move on . " 

  I looked away from the sea , behind the sliver of beach , where the hills first rose steeply , then flattened out . 

  I could make out a couple of dozen large buildings . 

  Some were of stone , some of wood . 

  All were a cut above the Polynesian houses . 

  One even had a flagpole and over the top of the trees below I could see the Union Jack fluttering . 

  " That's the local club , " Robins explained . 

  " Restricted to expats , preferably British . 

  Must be white or " Caucasian " as the Americans call " em . 

  Come on -- I shall show you round . 

  It's four o'clock -- opening time . " 

  If I had read a dozen Somerset Maugham books about colonial clubs in remote settlements , I could not have bettered my first impression of Tala-Tala's Union Jack Club . 

  It was little more than a house , really , with one lounge filled with basketwork chairs and with tables littered with old magazines . 

  There was a bar at one end of the room with a sign above saying " No thongs . 

  No singlets " . 

  Behind it two men in singlets were serving drinks . 

  Behind that was a billiard table , and near it a couple of bridge tables . 

  " You will have to join , of course , " said Bill , adding with a straight face , " if the committee accepts you , that is . 

  You will have to be proposed and seconded . 

  But I cannot see the local doctor being blackballed . " 

  It was obvious that the Union Jack Club was , to its members anyway , the local hub of the far-flung British Empire . 

  With the exception of a few New Zealand government officials , the other inhabitants had only come to Koraloona because they preferred it to life in reduced circumstances in a big city . 

  I cannot say I blamed them , for though the Union Jack Club might be pretentious , Koraloona was not . 

  And the expatriates were happy . 

  A sprinkling of members was busy ordering drinks and as soon as we approached the bar , there was a chorus of " Welcome back , Captain ! " or " Good to see you , Bill " . 

  The skipper of the Mantela was obviously a popular figure . 

  One man with a bristling moustache that almost twitched at the corners cried , " What's it to be , Bill ? 

  And your friend -- what'll he have ? " 

  " This is Colonel Archie Fawcett . " 

  I shook hands with the tall fair-haired man in his sixties , " and this is your new assistant doctor , Kit Masters . " 

  " By gad ! 

  You look young for a doctor , " cried Fawcett as he handed me a whisky . 

  " Colonel Fawcett is the administrator of Koraloona for the Cook Islands , " explained Bill Robins . 

  " No real work involved , " Fawcett beamed happily . 

  " Just a figurehead . " 

  " Do not be so modest , Archie , " said Robins , adding for my benefit , " The colonel is responsible for all manner of things -- the daily radio link -- " the sked " as it's known all over the Pacific-crime and punishment , what happens if the electricity breaks down . " 

  " Sounds a tall order , " I said . 

  " Not really . " 

  Robins gave a sideways teasing look at Fawcett . 

  " Though , of course , he's responsible for the financial arrangements -- sorting out the island's modest economics , including the allowance the New Zealand government pays Princess Tiare to support her honorary status as a princess . " 

  Innocently I pointed to a sign above the bar and asked Robins , " What's a thong ? " 

  I had never heard the word . 

  " One of those Japanese-style rubber slippers with a thong between the big toe and the next one -- the only way to keep the slipper in place . 

  Bad form to wear them in the club . " 

  " Strictly for the servants -- and Japanese of course , " added a lady who introduced herself as Mrs Fawcett , and asked anxiously , " Do you play bridge , Doctor ? " 

  I said that I did , if only fairly well . 

  " Wonderful , " cried one lady member . 

  " We're always short of a fourth . 

  Can you stay for dinner ? " 

  Interrupting quickly , Bill Robins said , " We've already been invited , I am afraid . 

  A sort of semi-official dinner with Doctor Reid . " 

  " What a pity , " said another woman . 

  " It's gala night -- a three-shilling three-course meal . 

  You cannot do better than that , even in London , can you ? " 

  " You certainly cannot , " I said , as another member shouted to " George " for drinks . 

  " Are both the stewards called George ? " 

  I asked a mystified Robins , who explained with a laugh that it had been Colonel Fawcett's idea . 

  He had read that , at the exclusive Beefsteak Club in London , every steward was addressed as George , and the colonel had decided to adopt the same rule to save people from remembering unnecessary names when stewards were changed . 

  " I am afraid we have to be on our way , Colonel , " Bill Robins explained . 

  " But I am sure that Doctor Masters will be in touch with you about joining . " 

  " A mere formality , dear boy . " 

  The colonel gave me a friendly pat on the shoulder , and we made for the outside world again . 

  As he started up the car and we made our way further round the island , Robins explained , " They're good sports , but every new face is welcome . 

  Some of them were bigwigs in the administration of the islands . 

  And now that they've retired on half pension , they're a damn sight better off than they would be in Sydney or Auckland , let alone London . " 

  We had gone about a hundred yards when one particular house caught my eye . 

  It was much larger than the others and set in a grove of coconut palms above the beach . 

  " That's the Villa Faalifu , which means " coconut " . 

  It belongs to a rich American , name of Paula Reece . 

  She owns the yacht in the harbour . 

  She's quite a lady . " 

  The dusty road encircled the island , here and there broken by small fishing settlements -- " village " would be too pretentious a word -- the country around us laced with waterfalls on the hills behind , small bays , one very shallow , the next a deep creek where the beach became a small headland , the pale colour of the sea turned indigo because of the depth . 

  As we turned another corner we came across a few villagers handling copra . 

  Robins stopped the car and we walked towards them . 

  " What's the difference between -- well , how do coconuts become copra ? " 

  I asked . 

  Robins picked a piece up off the beach . 

  " There's not much difference , " he admitted . 

  " Copra is the dried-out guts of the coconut , the endosperm and the embryo of the seed . 

  Remember desiccated coconut in cakes ? 

  That's shredded copra . " 

  Several men were splitting the hairy husks on iron spikes driven into the ground . 

  " Then they put them in the sun to dry out , and when the meat curls away from the shell it's put into sacks . 

  It's one of the staple exports of the islands , especially Hodges . 

  Cocos nucifera . 

  For years I used to carry the stuff . 

  It takes five thousand nuts to make a ton of copra , which sells at twenty-four pounds a ton ; and that in turn will only produce about a third of a ton of hair shampoo . 

  Looking at these fellers work , it makes you think ! " 

  We returned to the car and drove on until we came to a small wooden bridge spanning a rivulet of water coming from a waterfall not far up the hillside behind . 

  " Like a walk ? " 

  Robins indicated the waterfall . 

  " This is one of the few private properties on the island . 

  There's a secret pool where Princess Tiare's mother used to swim with her lover . 

  Kind of romantic . 

  When Tiare's mother died Tiare bought the land And now only she and her daughter are allowed to swim there . 

  And me . " 

  " Why you ? " 

  " Old friend of the family . " 

  He twisted his face into a grin . 

  " I've been given permission to swim in the pool when the family's not using it . 

  And it's easy to tell if they are because there'd be their car by the roadside . " 

  From the rickety bridge I looked upwards to the waterfall , perhaps fifty feet above us ; at the spot where it vanished into ferns and flowers it was frothing like a diaphanous white ball gown . 

  But the pool I could not see . 

  Robins led the way up the sloping path from the roadway , narrow but clearly defined , towards thick undergrowth , ferns , bushes , lined with every flower from hibiscus , tiare and oleander to the bougainvillaea curling round and clinging to the trees behind . 

  " It's only five minutes " walk , " he said , and sure enough , we soon reached the pool at the foot of the waterfall . 

  Where the fall hit the pool the water threshed as though boiling , but a few feet further on it was limpid , still , crystal-clear , hedged in by banks of ferns and tulip trees , and at the far end was the outlet where the water drained away to the sea . 

  " We're not there yet -- not quite , " said Robins . 

  " Follow me , it's quite safe . " 

  He led the way about six feet further up where the path ended in a flat ledge , and then I could see what had happened . 

  Immediately behind and above the waterfall , the sloping hillside had become a fifty-foot smooth rocky cliff , so that the water poured not only over the edge above , but out into the pool , leaving a ledge along which Bill Robins now beckoned me . 

  It was as dry as a bone , under a never-ending , roaring waterfall . 

  " Extraordinary , is not it ? " 

  He stopped to peer at the pool below through a " crack " in the water , rather as though someone was peeping through lace curtains . 

  " There's a cave in there . " 

  He pointed to a cliff behind the waterfall . 

  " Never gets wet . " 

  He glanced at me . 

  " Can you dive ? " 

  " Sure . " 

  " Diving into the pool is like a blind date , " he laughed . 

  " It's deep . 

  I've dived into it dozens of times . 

  But you have to dive through the waterfall without seeing the pool until the last minute . 

  Game for a try ? " 

  I nodded eagerly . 

  " Anything once . " 

  " We can undress here in the cave if you like . 

  No need for a costume in this part of the world . " 

  It was a curious sensation , diving into water I could not see , but once Robins had led the way , and was treading water in the pool , I followed without any fear . 

  How wonderful it was to be able to stop a car on impulse and bathe in a pool of crystal-clear water ! 

  We swam for about quarter of an hour and then walked back to the cave , dried ourselves as best we could on our shirts , and drove on , chests bare . 

  " It could tell quite a story , that pool , " said Robins . 

  " Sacred ground , in a way . 

  That's why it belongs to Tiare . " 

  " You're sure we were not trespassing ? " 

  I felt a touch of the sinister that rules so many of the islands ; there was no reason to shiver in that warm spot , but I did , and experienced a slight sense of embarrassment , as though I had been intruding , thinking perhaps not of Tiare but of the great love all those years ago which had produced her : forty years ago when the water was cascading over the same cliff in just the same way as it had today , Princess Tiare's mother and her lover had bathed in the same secret pool and later , perhaps , made love in the cave behind . 

  It fascinated me , though at first I could not tell why . 

  It was not the beauty alone that had made me draw in my breath . 

  Somehow , even to my youthful reasoning , it was as though the past was speaking to the present , that something of the love between these two people still lingered . 

  " You're not the first to be affected by the pool . " 

  Robins read my thoughts . 

  " It's extraordinary , really . 

  The scent of a deep , passionate love still clings to it . 

  I expect it sounds silly to you . " 

  " No . 

  It might have sounded embarrassing if I had said it , " I smiled . 

  " But I know what you mean . " 

  " I am glad , " he said simply . 

  " I understand this title of " Princess " , " I continued , " but Doctor Reid talked about a fortune . 

  I find that hard to believe . " 

  " Better let him tell you about it , " Robins advised . 

  " Alec Reid likes to tell his stories in his own goo-l time . 

  There's no other way of entertaining strangers . " 

  His face creased in its twisted , ironic smile . 

  " Doctor Reid did tell me about Tiare's daughter . " 

  " Aleena ? 

  Lovely child , " Robins said , echoing Reid's words . 

  " She goes to school at Sanderstown College , and I've got to know her well because she sails on the Mantela every holiday . 

  That's why I am allowed to swim in the secret pool -- a reward because her mother made me responsible for Aleena whenever she's on the Mantela . " 

  Dusk was falling swiftly , as it always does in the tropics , and the silence that had so impressed me by daylight suddenly became noisy with the night life of the jungly-type trees in the mountains behind-the bull frogs , strange bird cries , the never-ending background of the cicadas . 

  " Too late for any more sightseeing now , " said Robins . 

  " Let us make tracks for Green's or we will be late for supper . 

  Mollie's a stickler for punctuality . " 

  The clinic and the cottage hospital were up a small hill at the other end of Main Street , beyond the ship's chandler and the jetty where the Mantela was moored . 

  A few fishing boats sat in the lagoon , some outrigger canoes were drawn up on the sand and one small pleasure yacht , which must have come from another island , was anchored to a buoy . 

  In the deck well I could see a couple of girls and two men in bathing suits . 

  Three or four cars wheezed past us on the dusty road . 

  When Dr Reid arrived to fetch me at Green's he announced that he had left his car by the pier . 

  " We will walk there , but no further . 

  I puff too much for mountaineering . " 

  His car was an extraordinary contraption , an ancient Ford truck from which some amateur carpenter ( or maybe the ship's chandler ? ) had stripped off a ten-hundredweight body , and on the chassis had erected a kind of ambulance -- with a stretcher bed in it and one chair firmly screwed to the floorboards . 

  " This is ma private car and ma public ambulance , " Reid announced solemnly . 

  " No doot ye can drive ? " 

  I nodded . 

  " Is the clinic far ? " 

  " Nothing's far here . 

  There's a second road , parallel to Main Street , up the hill because it's cooler . 

  The Princess lives at the end of the same road . 

  There's a couple of Mission schools , nothing elaborate ye ken , for the local kids . " 

  As he spoke I could make out the red roofs of the bungalows dotted among the green trees . 

  " And , " he added , " there's half a dozen small lorries to carry heavy supplies -- stuff like diesel to run our own generator for electricity if the hydroelectric power fails . " 

  " Captain Robins drove me around the island last night , " I said . 

  " We stopped for a swim near Tala-Tala . 

  It's a pretty village . " 

  Reid nodded . 

  " Most of the fifty or so Europeans prefer to live in Tala-Tala rather than Anani , " he said adding , with a touch of sarcasm , " They say they dinna want to get contaminated by big-city life . " 

  We drove up the hill . 

  " And soon " -- Dr Reid waved a hand dramatically -- " you shall be seeing the eighth wonder of the world . 

  My clinic . 

  I call it " Harley Street " . 

  Here we are . " 

  Reid switched off his decrepit Ford in front of a building visible only in patches through the railings of a once-white wooden veranda , over which trailed bougainvillaea , syringa , convolvulus , and hibiscus in a riot of colour . 

  The sun splashed down in patterns of light and shade . 

  Beneath the flowering plants were slats of the veranda half eaten by ants or crumbling with tropical humidity . 

  Above , I saw where a hole in the tin roof had been repaired with a flattened-out biscuit tin that had once contained Huntley and Palmer's ginger nuts . 

  Inside the single-storey building a leathery-faced , middle-aged white woman hacked with a kind of parang at branches of flame trees which had worked their way through the open windows . 

  " Miss Sowerby , " Reid explained , " has been with us for several years . 

  Her father was a missionary and she felt the call to help him . 

  And helping the sick is holy work , eh Miss Sowerby ? " 

  She looked like the daughter of a missionary ; and I do not mean that in a derogatory way . 

  But in this warm and pleasant climate she was dressed in a long black dress which looked as though it had been made at the time of Heathcliff . 

  It had long sleeves ; a tightness above imprisoned her neck with its white linen collar . 

  Her belted dress had a piece of string attached from which dangled a pair of old scissors . 

  She was dressed as though ready for church . 

  Everything was there except a crucifix , and I did not doubt that this was hidden underneath a thick petticoat . 

  But was her obvious intensity entirely based on religious grounds ? 

  I wondered . 

  Most of it , certainly , but -- in the way a doctor always judges character as a routine diagnostic procedure -- I wondered if she was not repressing the normal feelings of a woman . 

  I do not mean sex in any simple way . 

  Many women can ache for the love of a child more intensely than for the love of a man . 

  It seemed to me that she looked older than she was , using her age as a shield against unwelcome advances which she might secretly long for but would never permit . 

  She could have been any age , for though her face was weathered by the sun , no wrinkles marred her face . 

  " Pleased to meet you , Doctor Masters . 

  " She put down her heavy curved knife and held out a gnarled hand . 

  " You will no doubt find us primitive compared with what you're used to . " 

  As Reid led me on a tour of the hospital he said , " She's a po-faced old girl , but her heart's in the right place ; and she understands the islanders . 

  Now , here's the ward . " 

  The " ward " was scarcely bigger than the waiting-room of St Thomas's teaching hospital , but its six iron bedsteads were meticulously lined up . 

  Every leg of every bed stood in a jar of water to frustrate the ruthless ants , while the " hospital corners " of the bedding were aligned with a draughtsman's precision -- even though the linen , I noticed , was yellowish and patched . 

  At one end of the ward a door led to a bathroom in which the " bath " was a large caulked wooden tub -- the sort one saw in the back-to-backs of the mining villages . 

  There was a flush toilet , and near it what Reid called " the wash-up " . 

  It had a large earthenware sink and an electric stove where one could heat water in a huge blackened kettle . 

  He led me back through the empty-ward to the other end . 

  " And this , Laddie , is the " admin " section . " 

  A tin trunk from the Army &amp;amp; Navy-Stores tropical department stood there , the lid thrown back to reveal files and cards held together with elastic bands . 

  I was fascinated by it . 

  " You mean that's all the Mission bought in the way of filing cabinets ? " 

  " Nae , ye mustn'a get it wrong . 

  This house was first built back in the 1890s as a residence for the local missionary . 

  There was nae a doctor there in those days . 

  The missionary looked after the islanders " health as well as their spiritual welfare . 

  Then , when the first priest arrived , he wanted to live in Tala-Tala near the kirk , so this became the first hospital , and this , " he almost kicked the battered old trunk , " became the first filing cabinet . 

  Tiare's mother gave it to the mission . " 

  Along one wall was a big cupboard with double doors , warped with heat and humidity and bearing the word Dispensary . 

  The doors were fastened with a padlock which a child of five could have picked with a paper clip . 

  " Another gift from Tiare's mother , " said Reid . 

  The contents were pathetic . 

  Some four-gallon jars contained different-coloured liquids ; these were numbered 1 to 4 . 

  Reid nudged me . 

  " Placebos . 

  But the patients are always fascinated by the colours . 

  I tend to dish out the red for man trouble , the blue for woman trouble , the yellow for baby trouble , and green for anything else . 

  Plus , of course , real treatment if the case demands it . 

  But you shall have'em buzzing round you like bees at a honeypot if you are not fairly strict . 

  To them medicine men are like gods . " 

  The next shelf down contained an array of jars and bottles of proprietary disinfectants and medicines -- Lysol , iodoform , Condy's fluid , peroxide , aspirin , Germolene , cough linctus and yeast tablets , together with blue-wrapped packets of cotton wool , bandages , ligatures . 

  Needles were stored in a two-pound Robertson's jam jar ; and in a long glass-topped case was a selection of knives , scalpels , forceps , scissors and syringes . 

  My confidence was not enhanced by the limited number of blue glass bottles and jars comprising the available pharmaceuticals -- chloroform , morphia , prussic acid , cannabis , strychnine , atropine . 

  I noticed that my case of drugs had been opened in one corner of the room , but still , it was a pitiful supply . 

  It was very different from when , during my student days , I had spent some time in the specialised wards of the Hospital for Tropical Diseases at St Pancras , where patients were treated for cholera , yellow fever , elephantiasis , malaria , leprosy , encephalitis lethargica , and a dozen other diseases that might have originated in the tropics . 

  When I examined the new drugs , I was glad to see some acriflavine -- a useful all-round skin antiseptic which has to be used with a bandage to prevent evaporation because of its alcohol base . 

  There was also some gentian violet and Eusol . 

  Reid saw me examining the Eusol -- an antiseptic used since the turn of the century -- and chuckled . 

  " Would not be without it , " he said . 

  " We discovered it . " 

  " We ? " 

  I must have looked puzzled . 

  " Edinburgh , the world's finest medical university . 

  That's why it's called Eusol -- E for Edinburgh , U for University and " sol " for solution . " 

  He took my arm and said , " Now come and see the operating theatre . " 

  The " theatre " ran parallel to the ward and we reached it through a short , glass-enclosed passageway . 

  The room contained little more than a long wooden table covered with lino , a barber's chair that had been slightly modified to accommodate dental patients , another deep earthenware sink , and a basketwork bed -- mounted on what looked like pram wheels -- for patients forced to lie supine . 

  It was used here , I assumed , for transporting the patients from the ward to the operating " table " . 

  Reid must have sensed my dismay , for he took my arm in a friendly grip and said , " Dinna take it too much to heart , Laddie , I've done my " trops " too . 

  I know the perfection of it all , but the ideal and the reality rarely match . 

  It's like life itself -- the prettiest girls are always on the Up escalator when you're on the Down . 

  And remember , if we need an urgent op I can fly a patient to Sanderstown in under the hour . 

  I can even fly a stretcher case . " 

  One patient only was in bed , a pitiful slip of a girl aged perhaps seven or eight . 

  Though she was dry-eyed she looked in great pain . 

  " Here is another case of the scourge of Koraloona , " sighed Reid . 

  " And one that I know you have a personal interest in -- polio . 

  " Reid drew back the sheet to expose the girl's dropped foot . 

  " I am going to operate later on tomorrow . 

  You see -- the calf muscle on the left leg just does not work , so if I do not do something quickly she will end up a cripple . 

  No power to keep the foot up like a normal one . " 

  " How did it start ? " 

  I asked as Reid pulled the sheet back over the little girl . 

  " The usual way , " he sighed . 

  " Undetectable at first . 

  That's the trouble with this bloody disease . 

  All these viral infections have the same symptoms in the first few days -- a patient might have " flu , measles , hepatitis -- ye canna tell during the porodomal period'-- he used the technical term for the period of incubation . 

  " I give them aspirin and hope for the best . 

  Then muscular stiffness suddenly develops , the patient is in agonising pain -- just like cramp in the leg -- and she shows signs of insecurity when walking . 

  Then you know -- and you have to operate . " 

  I had a sudden flash of memory of one of the most remarkable women I had ever met -- Sister Kenny , a woman who had made a great impact on me because of Clare . 

  She was Australian , had no real qualifications , but had created a furore in the medical world by her determination to use unorthodox methods in the treatment of infantile paralysis . 

  Heat treatment , self-help on the patient's part , and rehabilitation of the affected muscles by massage and exercise were the tenets of her faith -- and I had to admit that a great deal of what she practised depended on scorn for the accepted methods of treatment with splints , braces , and corsets which only assisted the patients in coping with unhealed limbs , not in any actual sense curing them . 

  Having a strong personality , she had battled her way into the medical profession and convinced many doctors by demonstration that at the very least they could not shut their eyes to the possibilities of her treatment . 

  I had witnessed Sister Kenny's unusual treatment when I went to see her at work at Queen Mary's Hospital for Children in Carshalton , one of several hospitals we had visited during our advanced student days . 

  I blurted out , " Doctor Reid , could I try to see if I could stop the disease without using splints or operating ? " 

  He looked at me in astonishment . 

  " Certainly not , " he said . 

  " You cannot just ignore everything that medical science has taught us . " 

  I would have liked to say that , so far , medical science had taught us nothing about polio , but I held my tongue . 

  He looked at me more kindly . 

  " You're thinking about the so-called " miracle cures " of Sister Kenny ? " 

  I nodded and he continued , " You've only just arrived on the island . 

  Have a wee bit of patience , Laddie . 

  Maybe soon I shall let ye have a chance to see if you can do anything -- but remember , miracles are often caused by good luck . " 

  " But I saw her perform those so-called miracles . " 

  " I promise you , you shall have the chance . 

  After all , the main reason I asked for an assistant was because of the danger of an epidemic of polio . 

  And I was told of your particular interest in the disease . 

  But -- " he held up a hand to stop me interrupting -- " let us take it slowly . 

  And let us remember that Sister Kenny is not even a professional nurse . 

  She helped some bairns when she was living in the Australian outback . 

  She did cure them , I grant you . 

  But maybe there they had only a mild form , or maybe it was not even real polio . 

  Remember , no one ever saw those bairns until they were cured . " 

  " But in London I did -- " 

  " I know . 

  And I appreciate your enthusiasm . 

  Just let us get settled in and then I promise to give you a chance . 

  In the meantime , I suppose you've seen an operation performed for a dropped foot ? " 

  I nodded . 

  " In med school , " I said . 

  " Come and see it again tomorrow , " he suggested . 

  " A local anaesthetic will be enough . 

  I shall give the girl quarter of a grain of morphia dissolved in water and inject it to calm her down . 

  Half an hour later I shall inject fifty millilitres of half per cent Novocaine . 

  She will be out in ten minutes , but I shall pinch some loose skin just to make sure there's no reaction . " 

  How often I had seen that pinching of the skin ! 

  The operation , I knew , was simple enough . 

  It consisted of stretching the Achilles tendon . 

  With a scalpel Reid would cut half way through one side of the tendon , half way through the other a little higher up , then pull the tendon which would stretch and later heal and join up . 

  This would enable him to restore the foot to the proper position of function , and he would keep it like that by strapping it into a right-angle splint , with a kind of plate under the foot attached to splints up the calf . 

  " Poor kid , " I muttered . 

  " Aye , " agreed Reid . 

  " But do not forget she will be lucky not to have a club foot . " 

  As we walked back to the dispensary he asked me , almost casually , yet in a way trying to find out how much I knew , " Tell me , what's the extent of your knowledge of polio ? " 

  " I made a study of it -- as much as the medical authorities would allow , " I said . 

  " You want chapter and verse ? " 

  " It's not necessary , " he laughed , " but -- " 

  So to impress him I told him briefly of the four stages of polio -- first the porodomal , second the muscle pain , then the period of muscle destruction which usually took no longer than fourteen days , and finally the period of repair . 

  " That's it , " said Alec Reid . 

  " And that's the trouble . 

  The muscle has the ability to recoil , but when it wastes away , the tissue has not . 

  It's like the difference between a bit of cotton and a bit of elastic . " 

  During our " inspection tour " I had heard a fair amount of noise from the garden , and now Miss Sowerby announced , " There's half a dozen patients , Doctor , including one who's hurt his head badly . " 

  " Let us start work , " Dr Reid sighed . 

  " There's nae peace for the wicked . " 

  Outside the front door stood the patients , including two men and three young girls . 

  They all stood up as though on parade , with the instinctive straight back of the Polynesians . 

  One man held a cloth soaked in blood to his forehead . 

  " You'd better come in first , " Reid motioned to him , and with a wave to the others announced , " This is Doctor Masters , our new doctor . " 

  The girls giggled , the other man smiled , and the " sick parade " , as Reid always called it , had started . 

  The other male patient was very different from the man who had hurt his head . 

  He was white , tall , and wore a scraggy beard . 

  He obviously looked ill , but what I found terrible was the look of starvation on his emaciated body and face . 

  Bedraggled , barefoot , dressed in dirty white ducks , he looked as though he were hovering on the verge of death . 

  Through a tear in the singlet I could see his rib bones sticking out . 

  He might have been forty -- or sixty . 

  As Reid led the patient with the bloody head indoors , the white man turned to me , almost stopped me from going inside and said in an educated voice , " Good morning , Doctor , and welcome to Koraloona . 

  I am Jason Purvis . 

  I am a writer . " 

  He added wryly , " As you can see , not a very successful one . 

  Doc Reid dishes me out a few vitamin pills when I am feeling lousy . " 

  He was tall , almost stooping , and with a mouth too sensitive for peace of mind . 

  Though I remained in the garden or the dispensary , helping some of the less sick patients , I saw Reid beckon Purvis inside , later , give him some pills , and then slip the man some money . 

  When the last patient had gone , Reid opened the refrigerator in the dispensary and took out a packet wrapped in white paper . 

  Before I had time to ask about Purvis , he explained , " My sandwiches for breakfast . 

  They keep nice and cool in the fridge . 

  Want some ? 

  Potted meat . " 

  I shook my head and Reid cheerfully walked on to the veranda , munching his " breakfast " -- his day's work apparently done . 

  " Tell me about the white patient , " I asked him . 

  " He looked terrible . 

  Purvis , was that the name ? 

  And is he really a writer ? " 

  " Aye . 

  Writes all day long , but as far as I can see never sells a word . 

  D'ye ken he's only thirty-seven ? 

  He's half starved -- and cannot do a thing about it . " 

  " But surely there's everything a man needs to live here -- food , fruit , fish , breadfruit ? 

  He's surrounded with the fruits of the earth . " 

  " That may be so , but he canna do a thing to help himself . 

  He canna climb up a tree for a coconut , he canna go up the mountain for wild bananas . 

  Cannot even fish . 

  But then , could you , with a spear ? " 

  " No , of course not . " 

  " So there's a paradox for you . 

  The islanders kill their wild pigs , they fish , they bake their breadfruit . They even make their own liquor without it costing anyone a penny -- yet there's this poor devil starving amidst plenty . " 

  " What's his background . 

  He's obviously educated . 

  Does not he have any money ? " 

  " He gets a remittance from England once every three months . 

  Then he spends it all at Robinson's store on drink , tinned meat , powdered milk and so on . 

  Once I even caught him buying tinned sardines -- with all that fresh fish in the sea ! " 

  While we talked Miss Sowerby had been cleaning up the patient with the head wound and , as the man prepared to leave , Reid cried to him , " Head feel'um better ? " 

  The patient beamed and proudly touched his bandage . 

  " Pain out now . 

  No gettum in with mask . " 

  " Good . 

  Now , be goodum feller and take med'cin along Princess . " 

  He handed the man a bottle and added sternly , " And no takum along self , savvy ? 

  Make better , women ; make bad , men . " 

  " Plenty savvy , " the man said . 

  " Me takum , make ill . " 

  He loped off cheerfully . 

  " He probably thinks it's a cure for the curse , " chuckled Reid . 

  " You will get used to the pidgin , by the way . 

  It's a language all its own , with rules and a grammar , but it has no definite article . 

  Hence the odd-sounding constructions . " 

  " Seems very odd to me . " 

  I could hardly understand all the curious words . 

  " Dinna imagine it's the local baby talk , " Reid went on . 

  " It's an international language which started so that people who travel between foreign countries can communicate -- the Chinese , stevedores , the old-time lascars , and so on . 

  When they load or unload a ship they can understand what's wanted . " 

  " I shall pick it up , " I promised . 

  " Incidentally , do you always use your patients as messenger boys ? " 

  I could not help laughing . 

  " Always . 

  That's their way of paying for the medicine . 

  One good cure deserves another . " 

  Then more seriously , after he had crumpled up the paper sandwich bag and put it into the waste bin , he said , " You will find , Kit -- it's Christian names , eh , Kit and Alec ? -- that the inhabitants of Koraloona are the kindest people on earth . 

  Because they want nothing , they're untouched by the evils of the outside world . 

  Every now and again some of the pearling luggers come this way . 

  They get short shrift . 

  We do not want any get-rich-quick people here . 

  Everyone on the island's got enough to eat . " 

  " Except Purvis ! " 

  I said . 

  " He's the exception , " said Reid . 

  " But what about money ? " 

  I asked . 

  " Surely -- " 

  " If they do want something that costs extra , there's always a way to make a few pennies . 

  There's about fifty Europeans on the island -- including Americans -- and there's plenty of men anxious to do a bit of gardening , or women ready to earn a day's wages doing the laundry -- you saw them at work -- or sewing . 

  There are fifty times as many Singer sewing machines as motor cars in Koraloona . 

  And the ship's chandler is always needing spare hands when a boat comes in . 

  So is Mick the barman . 

  But they work when there's fun in it , not to live . 

  Since most people own a plot of land , they have everything they need to keep alive . 

  A day's casual work takes on an extra meaning . 

  It's fun , not work ; a luxury , not a necessity . 

  What money there is circulates again and again , into the store , out , back again . " 

  " And drink ? 

  Do not they need money for drinking ? " 

  " Not much . 

  They like beer , but only as we'd drink champagne -- a treat . 

  They like kava . 

  They make it themselves , so it's cheap . 

  It's common all over the Pacific , and they drink it out of big wooden bowls , passing it round the circle . " 

  " Like palm toddy ? 

  Is not that the drink of South-East Asia ? " 

  " No . 

  Kava is made of the ground-up roots of the kava bush . 

  They mix it with water , and it's lethal , I tell you . 

  But though it's guaranteed to give anyone a hangover , I've nae heard of any islanders getting fighting mad on the stuff . " 

  " I hope it tastes good . " 

  " Horrible ! 

  But for those with a sweeter tooth there's always rum . 

  They make that from sugar cane , which often grows wild here . 

  And then there's orangeade . " 

  " Does not sound too potent . " 

  " Do not fool yourself . 

  There're so many wild oranges on the island that when they're ripe the boys and girls go out in gangs , pick them by the thousand , squeeze out all the juice and let it ferment in casks until it's ready for a week-long celebration . 

  You'd think they'd bottle it , make it last over the weeks or months , but they're simple people , and there's no holding them back . 

  No one would think of hoarding a year's stock for such a free tipple . 

  And they do not . " 

  " And now come and meet Nellie . " 

  Alec Reid led the way to a field behind the back door , held out an arm , like a conjuror , and cried , " There ! " 

  It was a single-engined biplane . 

  It looked fragile , held together by struts that seemed no longer than bits of wire . 

  " I learned to fly the Gloster before I left England , " he explained , " though I could never have afforded to buy a plane . 

  But my wife -- she's a rich woman , and generous -- saw an advert in The Aeroplane in 1936 offering one for 1,700 . 

  She bought it as a gift on my last trip to the UK . 

  It has a Bristol Mercury radial engine of 840 horsepower . 

  You know , you could pay more for a flashy car . " 

  " Still -- a very generous present , " I murmured . 

  " Aye , it is that . 

  My wife and I could never see eye to eye on the business of living . 

  She's all for the social whirl of Mayfair or Bond Street , while I like my peace and quiet . 

  So I see her on leaves , and she gives me every so often a new MCC tie ! " 

  He went on more seriously , " So we agreed to follow our different ways . 

  We correspond when we feel like it ; there's no bitterness . 

  It's a pity in some ways , but in others ... 

  " He shrugged his shoulders . 

  " If you're forced to live in a place you hate , it's the surest way to break up a marriage . " 

  I did not know quite what to answer , but he saved me the trouble . 

  " I think I can say I am a tolerant man , " he said , not without a trace of smugness . 

  " I make no judgments on man or woman , perhaps because I make no judgments on myself -- or my wife I've managed to preserve a friendship between husband and wife living thousands of miles apart , and that's nae a bad achievement . " 

  Alec moved up to the plane and ran a loving hand along its polished propeller blade . 

  " Nellie , the pride of the islands . 

  She will do a good two hundred miles an hour , and though she's got dual control you can take out the second seat next to the pilot's to make room for a stretcher . " 

  He showed me the cunning way in which Jim Wilson , the ship's chandler , had hinged the top of the fuselage so that a patient could be lowered into the plane on a stretcher once the second seat had been removed to give the extra length . 

  " Can you fly ? " asked Reid . 

  " Good Lord , no . 

  The only time I've flown was when I paid five bob for a trip in Alan Cobham's flying circus . " 

  " You'd better learn , " he said . 

  " It's dead easy -- I shall teach you . 

  It's our only quick link with the islands . 

  She does sterling work , does Nellie , fetching and carrying . 

  And if I have to , I can land on a stretch of roadway . 

  She makes the journey to Sanderstown in under the hour . " 

  " Suppose you need to make really urgent contact with Sanderstown . 

  You've no phone link , I take it ? " 

  " We've the radio link , twice a day . 

  Very simple . 

  It's up in what we call Cook Island House , where the three government officers work under Colonel Fawcett , or say they do . 

  We can pass or receive radio messages by voice at nine every morning and six every evening . " 

  The more I had to do with Alec Reid , the more I liked him . 

  It was easy to ridicule him -- his battered old topee , his stout figure , the perspiration which never seemed to dry up however often he mopped his bald pate . 

  But beneath this exterior there lived a man who treated the islanders with the affection which a good father bestows on his slightly wayward children . 

  You needed patience to tolerate the at times stupid , hypochondriacal old island ladies , but Reid offered them his placebos with no thought of the unnecessary work such trivial ailments caused him . 

  And you needed even more patience when others ignored danger signals warning of serious illness , such as the stiffness in the joints , dismissed as unimportant , yet because of the background of dirt , possibly resulting in tetanus , which could rarely be cured unless it was caught in time . 

  Alec Reid had no prejudice . 

  He treated every patient with the same love and care , and so , as I discovered very quickly , he was worshipped by the islanders . 

  He got on with everybody -- including me , to whom he remarked with his easy chuckle , " Here's to ye , Kit ! 

  At one stroke ye've halved the white man's burden ! " 

  I think -- I hope -- that in a sense the relief of having a young assistant was not only that it helped his work , but that he also welcomed the presence of a younger doctor with more up-to-date medical knowledge . 

  For I could tell that he was a little rusty , and I wondered if sometimes this affable and agreeable companion was worried because he knew that he was not keeping up with the strides that modern medicine was taking . 

  I never saw a copy of the Lancet lying round his living-room . 

  After a visit to the cottage hospital one day , Reid said to me , " There's nothing to do , Kit . 

  Take it easy . 

  I've told you about Paula Reece , the rich American . 

  She's giving a sort of cocktail party this evening and you're invited . 

  And after that you and I are going to have dinner together , so just relax until then and I shall pick you up at six . 

  Tomorrow you can move into your bungalow . " 

  I did just that . 

  After a cold bath and a trickling shower I fell fast asleep , before lunch , on the simple but comfortable iron bedstead . 

  I woke up after an hour or so , and just leaned out of the window looking at the half-empty Main Street . 

  A few small boats gently disturbed the ripples where the water's edge met the beach . 

  A couple of bare-breasted girls in sarongs were returning from the communal laundry , the washing balanced on their heads , their breasts moving gently as they sauntered by , giggling at some private joke . 

  At the far end of the street , where the beach curved into an arc -- and where the water was far enough away from the slops of Main Street -- there on my right I could see a grove of coconut palms behind the beach , almost bending over the sand like a canopy as they leaned against the trade winds . 

  And high above , at the end of the curve , the steep hillsides rose as high as the rim of the dormant volcano on High Island . 

  Alec Reid picked me up sharp at six , and gave an approving glance at my clean shirt , spotless white trousers ( bought off the peg in Sydney ) and the fact that I wore a tie . 

  " Let us go , " he said and led the way to the car . 

  The Villa Faalifu was set on the edge of Tala-Tala , and the sight of its opulent exterior almost left me gasping . 

  It might have been transported from the South of France , one of those lush semi-palaces I had only seen in photos . 

  It was all white , with stone steps , instead of the usual wooden ones , and on its huge veranda were several basketwork chairs and tables , and yellow sunblinds . 

  Every corner of the gardens blazed with colour -- bougainvillaea , oleanders , hibiscus and , around one corner of the house , a mass of white tiare . 

  And all immaculately neat . 

  Set in a glade of thinned-out coconut palms , it was breathtaking , but what amazed me most was that , within sight of the most beautiful beaches in the world , the garden contained a large pool edged with white and blue tiles . 

  A pool in such a place ! 

  It seemed crazy . 

  Around the pool a couple of dozen people were chattering and sipping drinks . 

  A butler , a Polynesian in a trim white jacket , approached us with a tray of drinks ranging from champagne to gin fizzes or Scotch and sodas . 

  I took a glass of champagne as Dr Reid whispered , " Here is our hostess . " 

  A tall woman came towards us . 

  She had the arrogant walk of people with leisure . 

  She gave Dr Reid , who was wearing a collar and tie and long white ducks , a kiss on one cheek , then turned to me . 

  She was dressed in an expensive pair of sharkskin trousers , a silk blouse and sandals . 

  She had lean flanks and no tummy , and I could see from the way her breasts moved slightly when she walked that she wore nothing underneath her blouse ; I also had the feeling that she knew instantly that I knew . 

  Her hair was reddish -- would an actual red have been too flattering a word ? 

  I wondered -- and I judged her age at about thirty . 

  She carried a pair of sun glasses in her left hand and offered me her right hand , smiling as she shook mine . 

  " Doctor Masters , is not it ? -- or can I call you Christopher ? " 

  " Kit , " I smiled . 

  " Paula . 

  I am sorry we did not meet before , but it's great to have you around . 

  We need every handsome new face we can grab- do not we , Alec ? " 

  She smiled , not only with her mouth , but with her very large eyes , a ready smile . 

  And she must have been fabulously rich to live in a house like this . 

  As someone took Alec Reid away I said , " The house is beautiful . 

  But is not it a bit unnecessary -- a pool I mean , with the beach on your doorstep ? " 

  " It's a salt-water pool . 

  I have it pumped up from the sea , with a small generator of our own . 

  And I would not like to cause the entire population to come and stare at me every day . " 

  " I do not quite understand . " 

  " I like to swim in the nude . " 

  She spoke in a matter-of-fact tone , as though all the best people did . 

  " Yes , I see . 

  " And , of course , I did . 

  It was one thing for the pale brown islanders to swim in their Mother Hubbards , or often , as I had been told , bare-breasted . 

  But for a white American to frolic completely naked ... 

  " Yes , " I repeated , smiling . 

  " I can see it might cause a few problems . " 

  " I hate to lose you , but we will meet again soon , " she said . 

  " You know Colonel Fawcett , I am sure . 

  He's a bit old for me -- I prefer young doctors any day . " 

  She laughed . 

  " Come along . " 

  Near me , in a white open-necked shirt with short sleeves was a stocky , rather wooden-looking man , who gave me a rather uncomfortable feeling of only being at the party because he had to be . 

  I understood why the moment Paula introduced him . 

  " And this is Captain Baker . 

  Ron is the skipper of my motor cruising yacht . 

  There , in the harbour . " 

  She pointed to the sleek white pleasure yacht which I had seen lying at anchor at the foot of the small hill , and chaffed Baker , " I always have the feeling he'd rather be on the water than on dry land . 

  I had to force him to come . " 

  The word " force " embarrassed me . 

  Paula was making it clear that she was the boss and that Baker had to do as he was told -- whether sailing her yacht or sipping drinks . 

  " She's a beauty , " Baker said as Paula moved on to greet another guest . 

  There was real enthusiasm in his voice . 

  " She's got two 500-horsepower diesel engines which can take the Nymph and six passengers in three double state-rooms from here to Hawaii non-stop . 

  You must come aboard and see her some time . " 

  " Come and say hello to some other guests , " Paula interrupted us . 

  She motioned to a man I had not seen before , striking in appearance , with a shock of grey hair and immaculately dressed . 

  He smoked through a long amber cigarette holder . 

  " This is Count Vrinsky , " she introduced me . 

  " He's an American citizen now , but he comes from one of Poland's oldest and most distinguished families . 

  He collects paintings . " 

  The count puffed out smoke through his long holder as we shook hands , and then Paula Reece asked him , " Vrin , be an angel and let us have a little piano music . " 

  As the count walked into the house , I asked innocently , " I thought you said he was an art collector . 

  Is he a pianist too ? " 

  " You're sweet , " she smiled invitingly . 

  " Every year when I come to Faalifu for four months or so I engage a resident pianist from California . 

  It's essential to have those tinkling notes when you feel in the mood . 

  As a matter of fact , I've also got a resident hairdresser and a resident dressmaker . 

  It makes life easier for me , and they do not get overworked , so it's a wonderful holiday with pay for them . " 

  I already recognised some members of the Union Jack Club , and Colonel Fawcett gave me a hearty handshake while his thin , ill-looking wife reminded me about joining the bridge games . 

  Making up a four was obviously a serious problem . 

  Immediately she asked me when I might be free , but I was able to murmur , " It's a little difficult , Mrs Fawcett , until I get around a bit more and establish some duty rosters . " 

  " We're counting on you , " she said archly . 

  I was still standing by the pool when I saw Tiare , who walked towards me from her parked car and asked , " How are you settling in , Doctor ? 

  Have you got the problem of help solved ? 

  It's very difficult in an island where no one really needs to work . " 

  " I've been lucky . " 

  I told her what had happened , but quietly . 

  I noticed again the touch of reserve about her . 

  A doctor sometimes sees people with a different eye from other people , and I wondered for a moment whether , despite her beauty and her apparently special position on the island , she was really happy . 

  The world is filled with sad women who put a brave face on their unhappiness , even on a tropical island . 

  But she smiled , especially when another girl in her early twenties joined us , saying , " Hello , Princess . 

  And you must be Doctor Masters . " 

  " You're sure ? " 

  I laughed at the times people had used that sentence to me . 

  " Well , you're the only white man in Koraloona I've never seen before ! 

  I am Lucy Young . 

  I work for Paula . 

  I am her general factotum . " 

  " Faalifu would close down if Lucy did not run it , " said Princess Tiare . 

  " How are you , Lucy ? " 

  It's hard sometimes to describe people one only meets casually , one's observations , thoughts even , especially when interrupted by people serving drinks , or other guests barging in . 

  So all I can remember from that first evening by the pool is a general physical impression -- of a sweet , typically Californian girl in her early twenties , with long legs , a firm bust , wide-apart eyes below blonde hair and -- oh yes , of course ! -- hundreds of freckles . 

  She looked the sort of girl who is so often a trademark of California -- a girl who could dance all night , yet play tennis or golf , ride or swim the next day without the slightest effort . 

  " Do you like swimming or sailing ? " 

  Lucy asked . 

  " Swimming , yes . 

  Sailing , only if there's an expert around . " 

  " Lucy's an expert . " 

  Alec Reid had joined us . 

  " You'd be quite safe with her . 

  Well , as far as the sailing is concerned . " 

  Ignoring the dig , Lucy said , " Paula keeps a small sailing boat with an outboard motor , and now and again she lets me use it . 

  You'd be surprised how beautiful the other side of Koraloona is when you see it from the sea . " 

  " It's a date . " 

  I tried to match her Californian accent . 

  " If you can fix it with your boss , I can fix it with mine . " 

  We stayed at the party till eight o'clock , but many others , including several members of the Union Jack Club , remained to play bridge . 

  As we drove to Alec Reid's house for our first dinner together -- and the first sight of his house -- I said , " You know , Alec , I thought this was going to be a simple unsophisticated life on the next best thing to a coral atoll . 

  Instead I've been thrust into the sort of social whirl I never experienced in Nottingham -- or in London , for that matter . " 

  " There's nothing else for people to do . " 

  He carefully turned the corner leading up to the hill behind Anani . 

  " So they throw parties , with the same people in attendance every time . 

  Thank goodness there's no duty on alcohol ! " 

  " Super house Paula has . 

  I liked her secretary -- Lucy . " 

  " I thought you were not slow in agreeing to the sailing trip . 

  But watch your step , Kit . 

  " He stopped the car at the end of his garden . 

  " Lucy has a job in a million . 

  I'd hate her to suffer , because of you . " 

  Dr Reid's bungalow -- half a mile or so up the hill -- was a house of character , a real home , filled with the personality of the man himself . 

  This was hard to pinpoint , for as a doctor he was , to say the least of it , a sloppy , unorthodox dresser -- a fact echoed by his large airy living-room , with its couple of ceiling fans , lazily turning . 

  I had the impression that there were hands anxious to tidy up , but never succeeding . 

  Large armchairs , with loose covers , looked comfortable , but when I sat in one it had a broken spring . 

  A magazine rack overflowed with rolled newspapers : they had obviously arrived by post , but many were unopened , as though Reid had not had time to catch up with news that must have been at least a month old . 

  Even with the drama of Munich and the prospect of war it seemed as though Alec Reid had not found time for the outside world . 

  No sooner was I seated than Reid shouted out , " Bubble and Squeak ! 

  Old Rarity ! " 

  Mystified , I watched a pale brown girl in her teens enter with a tray on which there were two bottles of whisky -- one squarish , one round -- glasses , and a jug of water kept clean with a small muslin cover edged with blue beads . 

  What happened next was evidently part of a carefully rehearsed rigmarole . 

  " You'd like what we Scots call a wee dram ? " 

  Reid asked . 

  " Love to . " 

  " Ice ? " 

  As it happened I did not like ice in whisky and this pleased Alec . 

  To the girl , he shouted , " Square ! " 

  At which she reached for a bottle of whisky called Old Rarity . 

  He explained : " I serve ordinary Scotch only to people who like ice . 

  But Old Rarity's my own favourite tipple . 

  It costs thirteen shillings instead of twelve-and-six for the standard brands , so I am not giving it to heathens who spoil its flavour with ice . " 

  The girl poured out a generous measure and then , obviously without the faintest idea what she was saying , but had learned by rote , she smilingly asked me " Saywhenpleasesir ? " 

  She must have thought she was using some magic password known only to the foreigners who drank this strange golden liquid in preference to kava . 

  After handing me a glass she gave one to Reid , and then , as though unthinkingly , straightened the fringe of hair round the back of his neck . 

  " Cheers . " 

  Reid held up his glass . 

  " And welcome to ma modest home . " 

  " You seem to have your barman -- or rather , bargirl -- well trained . 

  But I am puzzled by the " Bubble and Squeak " shout you gave . " 

  " It's quite simple . 

  A couple of twin girls do for me . 

  Unpronounceable names . 

  As like as two peas in a pod . 

  I cannot tell'em apart , so I call'em Bubble and Squeak , and whichever one answers it does not make any difference . " 

  We walked out on to the large veranda and sat down with the lagoon spread out below and in front of us . 

  I still could not believe I was here , in a different world , all peace and beauty . 

  That and the intriguing touch of intimacy when she had stroked the back of his neck . 

  At first we just made conversation , but after a couple of drinks Reid looked at me thoughtfully , twiddling his half-empty glass , and said , " There's no reason not to tell you this , Kit , but since we've got to work together , I'd rather explain my mode of living before the old cats on the island -- the European gossips -- start telling you stories . 

  I have no time for gossips , but in an island like this -- " he called for another round . 

  " This is not London , you know , and the local girls are happy-go-lucky , so the relationships when you're living in the same house tend to be even more happy-go-lucky . " 

  " I understand , " was all I could murmur . 

  " Do not get me wrong , " Reid added . 

  " I am a happily married man , but as I told you , I've had to compromise . 

  When I get to our house on Wimbledon Common -- that's every three years , when I get leave -- it's wonderful to be back . 

  But only for the first day or so ; after a week I cannot wait to return to Koraloona . " 

  Though I was new to the island , I had read enough -- from Henty to the Boy's Own Paper -- to understand that the spell of the South Seas , with its different tempo of life , must grow on a man until it reaches the stage where it can not be resisted . 

  It forms a part of a man's life , more deeply ingrained as he matures . 

  So , even though I was young and inexperienced , I felt that I could appreciate some of the feelings of men like Captain Robins , and now this strange and kindly doctor , " happily " married to a woman rich enough to live in a big house facing Wimbledon Common while he preferred a far-off island ; each partner more in love with a way of life than with one another . 

  " As a matter of fact , " Alec Reid firmed down a new pipeful of tobacco , " I might ha " made a name for meself had I remained in Edinburgh . 

  I had a guid record , and my wife had it all planned out . 

  She had a tidy amount of money of her own . 

  And she'd have bought me a practice . 

  But then I asked for just one spell of six months as a locum in some exotic place . 

  As ye know , most doctors in the islands get six months' leave every three years , and I volunteered to take one man's place soon after I had qualified . 

  Took the wee wife along too . " 

  He chuckled again at the memory . 

  " It happened to be Koraloona . 

  She hated it . 

  I fell in love with it . 

  When the resident doctor whom I was replacing died in Australia during his leave , the missionaries offered me his job . 

  And ye know , I never hesitated . 

  My wife went back to Britain . 

  She said I'd chosen the path to failure . 

  Aye , we're still friends , but she will never understand that I am nae a failure , I am a success . 

  I've discovered the secret of happiness . 

  That's my success . 

  I want nothing more of life . 

  I have no regrets . 

  D'ye ken anyone who can boast of that ? 

  But maybe ye'll be different , ye just want a taste of the exotic life and then ye'll go back to the big time . " 

  I wondered . 

  At that moment I could see no reason for ever wanting to leave Koraloona . 

  I could visualise , as we sat under the rattan shade of the veranda , passing a perfect life on the island -- a comfortable house , a garden in which I could grow everything I needed , enough fish to eat . 

  Enough work so that I could enjoy it but not so much work that I would be fed up . 

  " Ye may stay , at that . " 

  Alec Reid relit his pipe . 

  " But dinna let me persuade you with a lot of sentimental drivel . " 

  " I think I shall stay a while , " I smiled . 

  " As your assistant . " 

  As though reading my thoughts , Reid added , wiping his sweating head , " It's the way of life I like , nothing more , ye ken ? 

  You will find out for yourself , Kit . " 

  He was a strange man . 

  He had had all the advantages of what my father called " a good family background " ; he spoke with an educated voice ; he had been raised to respect good manners . 

  Yet this contrasted oddly with his sloppy clothes , his bare knees and hairy legs , for he seemed to see nothing peculiar about a doctor who behaved like a gentleman but who looked like a beachcomber . 

  However , even my limited medical training told me that Alec Reid was good at his profession ; his medical supplies might be limited , but he knew his South Seas . 

  In a way , though , that limited him and made him out of touch with modern medicine . 

  Picking up his last remark , I asked , " Do all the girls have the same happy-go-lucky attitude to -- well , friendships ? 

  After all , there are girls and girls , even on a South Seas island . " 

  " I do not quite understand ? " 

  " Well , the Princess . 

  You told me you'd explain about Tiare and her daughter , where they fit into the island . " 

  " Oh , Tiare ! 

  She's married for the second time . 

  Her husband , Aleena's stepfather , is called Mana . 

  He's half Japanese . 

  He guards both wife and daughter like a samurai . 

  He's a terrible man . " 

  " What's his full name ? " 

  " He does not have a surname , like many men on the islands , " Reid explained . 

  " And Aleena's real father ? " 

  " Died . 

  For no apparent reason . 

  My belief is that Mana wanted to marry Tiare -- maybe for the inheritance -- and it's made Aleena very unhappy . 

  That's really why Aleena , who's only thirteen , goes to boarding school in Sanderstown . 

  Gives her a bit of freedom . 

  And of course there's nothing on Koraloona but the two mission schools I mentioned . " 

  " It all sounds very mysterious . " 

  I was puzzled . 

  " Look , I've promised I shall tell ye the story of that family , and after dinner I will . 

  But now , I am starved . " 

  With a sudden change of voice he gave a roar , " Bubble and Squeak ! 

  Makeum dinner fast ! " 

  " Coming sir , " they both trilled , and soon we were sitting down at the dining table in a corner of the living-room . 

  " It's only rissoles , I am afraid , " said Alec , but if I felt a pang of disappointment that the first meal at his house was not going to be out of the ordinary I was mistaken . 

  No rissoles ever tasted so good . 

  I gratefully accepted a second helping . 

  " What on earth do you put in them ? " 

  " Actually they're meat and coconut , just mixed together with a touch of coriander . 

  Like the sauce ? " 

  I did . 

  " The Polynesians combine the most extraordinary opposites . 

  This is basically made of mangoes and chopped green peppers . 

  Sounds foul , but it tastes good on meat . " 

  After dinner , sitting on the veranda , with his pipe well alight and with a glass of neat Old Rarity at his side , Alec Reid told me the extraordinary story of the fortune which he said belonged to Tiare . 

  For the sake of clarity , and since its fate is fundamental to what happened later , I have tried to omit my interruptions and the questions which demanded answers , and reduce it to a simple account based on the facts that Alec Reid told me . 

  Tiare's mother , the hereditary Princess , who received an allowance from the New Zealand government , was called Marama -- which in one Polynesian sense means " woman " but in her case meant " Princess Woman " . 

  When still unmarried , she met a penniless and obviously sick Frenchman who had lived in the South Seas and had come to Koraloona to paint . 

  It was not just the usual liaison : the two of them fell head over heels in love . 

  From stories handed down , it seems that the Frenchman saw Marama , insisted on painting her straight away , and then said she was the most beautiful woman he'd ever seen and begged her to come and live with him . 

  Which she did . 

  Very happily . 

  Though the artist was ill with tuberculosis and had no money to pay for his keep , Marama looked after him while he painted her over and over again ; sometimes nude , sometimes dressed , and nearly always against the background of island scenery -- near the waterfalls and the secret pools , in dells that laced the volcanic slopes , in the village market , in the main street of Anani . 

  The illness -- the tuberculosis -- slowly worsened , and soon it was apparent that the painter would die unless he received medical attention . 

  He was racked by coughs that almost tore him apart . 

  Sometimes he spat blood . 

  He was undernourished . 

  And Koraloona in those days had virtually no medical facilities . 

  The painter told Marama that if he wanted to live he must go to Rarotonga and receive treatment . 

  He begged Marama to travel with him , but she refused . 

  For one thing , she said , they could hardly scrape up enough money for one deck passage , let alone two , for in two years he had sold only three paintings for a few pounds . 

  There was another reason which Marama did not reveal , until the day before he was due to sail , when she told the painter that she was three months pregnant . 

  The painter at first refused to sail . 

  He was , he said , overjoyed at the thought of her having a child . 

  But staying meant dying , and now the painter had an added reason for wanting to live . 

  And he knew that Marama , because of her title , would always be looked after if she stayed on Koraloona , so it would be wrong of him to be selfish and expect her to live in semi-starvation on a strange island . 

  The painter promised to return as soon as he was well . 

  And on the last day he led the girl he loved to a shack he had built behind their tiny house and which he called his studio . 

  She was staggered . 

  The walls were a blaze of colour -- vivid , exciting , dramatic paintings that all but covered the walls , and she was in nearly every one of them . 

  " These are for you , " he told her . 

  " They are a keepsake . 

  There are seventeen of them and a few sketches . 

  If you are short of money , you might get a few pounds for one , but if not , keep them till I return to see you -- and our child . " 

  " I shall never sell them , " cried Marama . 

  " That I vow . " 

  In fact the painter never did return to Koraloona -- and Marama , his mistress , always thought he had abandoned her , and over the years became obsessed by bitterness at the betrayal , for she never knew that in 1903 the painter had died , after she had given birth to a daughter , a baby girl so white that her mother christened her Tiare , after the beautiful white flower of the South Seas . 

  By the time Tiare was ten , her mother made the girl promise never to marry until she was at least nineteen , telling her that hasty love affairs never led to happiness . 

  Tiare made the promise which was solemnised by the local " witch-doctor " . 

  But when Tiare's mother died and Tiare was only seventeen , she broke the vow . 

  The local spiritual leaders warned her that she would suffer , after she fell in love and married -- and she did , after the birth of Aleena . 

  " And I shall tell ye , " Alec Reid summoned Bubble and Squeak for another drink , " that's a guid reason why the young kid Aleena will never wed before she's nineteen . 

  She knows what happened to her grandma and her mother Tiare , who took a beating and made Aleena take the same vow . 

  Aleena's a serious kid and she's learned the lesson . " 

  " All that's fine , " I said , though I was not particularly interested in the vows of a child who had just gone to boarding school . 

  " You say that the paintings have been handed down . 

  Is that all there is to the story ? " 

  I was a little disappointed . 

  " Will they ever be worth anything ? " 

  " Aye , they might , " said Alec Reid drily . 

  " After all , the man who fell in love with Princess Marama and left the paintings to Tiare was a Frenchman you might have heard of -- Paul Gauguin . " 

  Suddenly , sitting there on the veranda sipping whisky , I coughed and spluttered into my glass . 

  " Heard of ! " 

  It was Gauguin whom Maugham had made the hero of The Moon and Sixpence . 

  And not long before leaving England I'd read a newspaper item revealing that a Gauguin landscape bought by another novelist , Hugh Walpole , in 1924 for 145 would now in the thirties be worth around 6,000 , and that Hermann Goering in Nazi Germany had recently paid Alfred Krupp the armaments boss 10,000 Reichmarks for another of the wayward artist's pictures . 

  6,000 was double what a Rolls-Royce Phantom III cost , three times as much as Reid's Gloster plane ! 

  Thus had values increased . 

  " Gauguin ! " 

  I said . 

  " They must be worth a fortune ! " 

  " They could be worth a million for all the difference it would make , " said Reid . 

  " They will never be sold . 

  The old lady , Marama , vowed never to sell , and made Tiare and eventually Aleena repeat the vow . " 

  With a dry touch , he added , " They take their vows seriously in the islands . 

  There are native gods and most islanders are genuinely afraid of them . " 

  " Gauguin ! " 

  I repeated . 

  The very name was invested with magic . 

  " All here on this tiny island , " I said . 

  " Little more than a coral atoll . 

  And seventeen times six thousand ... " 

  " Plus a few sketches he left behind , " added Reid . 

  " But do you realise what they could fetch one day ? 

  Art prices have been soaring . 

  People are buying pictures as a hedge against war and inflation . 

  Who knows , if the Gauguins were left on the island one day they might be worth -- " I drew a breath -- " twenty or even thirty thousand each ? " 

  " I wouldn'a go as far as that , " Reid reproved me . 

  " But where are they ? " 

  And before Reid could answer , further questions tumbled out . 

  " Are they still in good condition ? 

  They must be forty years old , at least . 

  What about the exposure to sea air ? 

  Are they properly protected ? " 

  " Do not panic , Laddie ! 

  One question at a time . 

  I am not sure exactly where they're stored , but Tiare told me once that her father " -- that sounded an odd description of Gauguin -- " had given her mother instructions on how to protect them . 

  I am sure they're stored properly . 

  I am also sure that they're well and truly hidden from prying eyes like yours or mine . " 

  Of course , it was none of my business where the " missing " Gauguins were stored , except that I would have enjoyed seeing them , even if prompted only by curiosity . 

  After all , it's not everyone who has a private view of paintings worth 100,000 -- a lot of money in those pre-war , pre-inflation days -- but which have never been on public view . 

  " Have you seen them ? " 

  I asked . 

  Reid nodded . 

  " Aye , I have . 

  When Tiare's husband knew he was dying he thanked me and wanted to know if there was anything he could do -- a kind of last request . 

  I asked him if he or Tiare could let me see the " inheritance " ; and I saw it . " 

  " Wonderful ? " 

  " I suppose so , but it's a matter of taste . 

  Remember , I am of Scots descent , and I prefer our own artists like Willie Flint with his pretty titty girls or William McTaggart . 

  Did you know that Queen Victoria put him in the same class as Landseer ? 

  I do not take to these modernistic people who just splash on daubs of paint . 

  Whoever saw a beach of red sand , or a woman with a green face ? 

  Give me the Monarch of the Glen any day . 

  " But enough about pictures ! 

  Have a wee deoch and dorris afore ye go ? " 

  " You mean one for the road ? " 

  I smiled . 

  " I've never heard the expression before -- what did you call it ? " 

  " Ye dinna say ! 

  Ye never knew how the other half lives ! 

  Deoch means drink and dorris means door . 

  So it's one for the door if ye prefer it . " 

  It took me some time to put the fantastic story of the Gauguin inheritance behind me -- not out of my mind , but to the back of it , not only because I wondered if they might deteriorate , but also at the bizarre irony of a family sitting on a fortune which they refused to touch . 

  However , a couple of days later I moved into my bungalow and it was quite a job . 

  In preparation for a long stay , I had several suitcases , a packing case , a cabin trunk , my portable gramophone and records , all my medical equipment . 

  I had help lugging the heavy cases from Jim Wilson's truck , but I had to do my share ; and even thinking of where to put things was exhausting . 

  By the time this chore was finished , I was so tired I fell into a doze on the veranda , dreaming of a Gauguin nude of Aleena's grandmother , and then of a painting of Tiare and her daughter , and then how easy it would be if they could all come and live with me and we could just hang the pictures on the walls and enjoy them . 

  Reality was more drab , I thought ruefully when I woke up . 

  The only decoration on the walls of my new home consisted of an old half-used calendar for 1935 . 

  Actually it was not a bad bungalow , and I soon settled in . 

  It was impersonal , furnished to the exact specifications of any government building in the islands that goes with a civil servant of a particular grade ; the chairs and table in " ant-proof " hardwood , lacquered a pale brown , three armchairs , one sofa , chairs and table on the verandah , a desk , two bedrooms , a couple of beds , their legs in jars of water , a shower . 

  Impersonal , yes , but quite practical , though of course lacking the warmth and atmosphere I enjoyed at home . 

  Still , I had an overseas news radio set and sometimes at dusk when I turned it on for the BBC overseas news , the light on its dial welcomed me like a beacon from home . 

  In a way though , the garden was the best feature . 

  By design or nature , it was on the hill above Main Street and was large and ringed with thirty-foot-high breadfruit trees shading the ground with their thick , dark green leaves . 

  There was a pomelo tree , its fruit tasting like grapefruit , but each one the size of a football . 

  One hedge was of sago . 

  Until I first inspected the garden I had not even had the faintest idea that you could grow your own sago as a fence against your neighbour and then eat it ! 

  There was one big mango tree , a couple of coconut palms , their tufted branches reminding me of Mother's feather duster . 

  All of this magical garden was set in an acre of tough , fibrous grass on which a boy with a curved knife squatted on his haunches while cropping the " lawns " . 

  It was wonderful . 

  If the garden was more exciting than my dwelling , there was a good reason why Alec Reid's house should have a more lived-in feeling . 

  His wife had come out to the island on his first posting and , before she decided to return to London , she had bought the bungalow and furnished it . 

  " She made a good job of it too , " Alec explained , adding like a good Scot , " and of course there's a small benefit to me because now I draw a rent allowance . " 

  In only one respect were my original living arrangements altered , and it was all for the best . 

  The girl who had been selected for me by Miss Sowerby never turned up . 

  It transpired that her family had moved to Tala-Tala and she could not face the daily ten miles on foot . 

  Instead Miss Sowerby had discovered an excellent young half-Chinese man of twenty-two , and like most Chinese he could cook , do the laundry , press and whatever little else was needed about the house . 

  In other words , a cookboy . 

  He was called Toma . 

  Everyone wanted to help ! 

  The feeling of hospitality , of kindness , was warming . 

  When I said goodbye to Mollie Green she announced , " The next lunch is on me , Doc . " 

  And before Bill Robins left for Sanderstown he gave me his address and telephone number , saying , " I shall be really hurt if you ever come to Sanderstown and do not look me up . 

  " And then , a few days later , I had an unexpected bonus . 

  The man responsible was Jason Purvis . 

  I had been horrified at his scarecrow appearance when I first saw him at the clinic , and when I met him by chance in Tala-Tala I felt so sorry for him that I asked him if he would like to come for dinner . 

  I am not quite sure what prompted the invitation . 

  Perhaps it was because I found it hard to define his place on the island . 

  He looked like a half-starved bum yet he was evidently a man who had known better times . 

  I do not quite know why , but he gave me the impression , without uttering more than a few words , that he had much more than superficial knowledge , and an amusing touch of the sardonic as well . 

  " I'd love to . 

  I am starving . 

  Literally . " 

  Then he added , " Black tie ? " 

  " Not tonight , " I said gravely . 

  " I think an open-necked shirt . " 

  " By the way , " he said , " I was passing by your bungalow last night when I heard you playing a gramophone . " 

  I nodded . 

  " Well , I've got loads of records but nothing to play them on . 

  I had to flog mine . 

  Do you like classical music ? 

  Shall I bring some round ? 

  Do you like piano music ? " 

  With an almost sad look that increased the appearance of melancholy , he said , " I remember hearing Pachmann playing the Chopin B Minor Sonata at the Aeolian Hall in Bond Street in 1929 . 

  I can even remember the date , September 29 . " 

  " I'd love it . 

  I shall come and pick you up , " I said , not out of courtesy , but because Purvis did not look as though he had the strength to carry even a dozen records . 

  In the end Purvis and his records opened up a new world for me , starting on that very first dinner when we played Beethoven's Archduke Trio , the one in B flat major , " Opus 97 , " he added casually . 

  " Keep the lot , " he said , " then you shall have to invite me again to hear my own records . 

  One meal a week with you and I will not even have to go cap in hand to Johnson's store . " 

  " You do not like Johnson do you ? " 

  I did not either and he knew it . 

  " I cannot stand him , " he said . 

  " He does not do a damn thing for the good of mankind , but makes one hell of a fat living by buying cheap from one worker and selling the same thing dear to another worker . 

  Just a bloody parasite . " 

  " But still , " I smiled , " you do need the go-betweens of this world . " 

  " You know what I mean . 

  You're a doctor with an Oxford education . 

  You do something useful . 

  So does a coalminer who's had virtually no education . 

  I respect both of you equally . 

  But Johnson ! 

  He does not do a damn thing , he does not even pay his wife wages -- I give up ! " 

  Another bonus arrived within a week , when I had the first glimpse from the sea of the opposite coastline of Koraloona , with its empty sandy beaches and the great dormant volcano of High Island rearing up behind it , while in the distance I could even make out Hodges , the copra island . 

  And I did not see this from the decks of the Mantel a but from a twenty-one-foot sailing boat , Faalifu III , piloted skilfully by a skipper wearing white shorts , a kind of woollen T-shirt and a saucy sailor's cap -- Lucy Young . 

  She had promised to take me sailing , and Paula had let her borrow the boat for a few hours , as she had often done before . 

  I arranged to meet her in the tiny port at Tala-Tala where she was waiting for me . 

  She looked so fresh and happy that I started grinning as soon as I waved to her , standing below me in the cockpit of the boat , where a servant from Faalifu was carrying some packages while Captain Baker looked down from the bridge . 

  " It's beautiful , " I said as the man stowed the parcels into the tiny cabin . 

  " But I warn you , I am a landlubber : I've never sailed a boat in my life . 

  I vaguely remember words like " mizzen mast " , but I have not a clue what any of them mean . " 

  " Do not worry , we have an outboard motor . 

  We will forget the sails . 

  Then it's just like driving a car . 

  I've got a packed lunch , a thermos of ice-cold martinis , and some beer and Coke . 

  Welcome aboard ! " 

  As I clambered into the boat , moored near her big yacht , Lucy took the bottles of beer and Coca-Cola and put them into an open net bag which she lowered over the side , tying the net with a long rope to a hook on the gunwale . 

  " Once we start moving , " she explained , " the water rushing past will keep your beer colder than any fridge . " 

  I went below and peered inside the cabin -- a tiny fixed table with divan-type seats on either side . 

  " Supposed to turn into beds , " she said , adding lightly , " but not my idea of a honeymoon suite . " 

  It was a beautiful sunny morning , and at eleven o'clock , after I had done a quick surgery , we chugged quietly out of the harbour , with Lucy at the controls . 

  Once outside she said , " I've got my costume under my clothes . " 

  She started to pull the jersey over her head . 

  " You can change into your bathing trunks in the cabin . 

  But keep your sports shirt on until we start swimming . 

  With the sea and sun and wind you shall fry if you do not take care . " 

  Inside the cabin , separated from this long-legged , tanned Californian girl who never seemed to stop smiling , I felt a tingle of pleasant , uncomfortable tightness in my close-fitting trunks . 

  What a pretty , unaffected girl she was , full of life and fun . 

  And efficient ! 

  The way she sailed the boat . 

  What on earth was a stunning girl like this doing in Koraloona ? 

  " It's a breath of fresh air having you around , " I said . 

  " What made you come to Koraloona ? " 

  " I met Paula at a party in San Francisco where she lives . 

  She needed a manageress , if that's the right word , three years ago -- a sort of paid annual summer vacation . " 

  " Is it really a vacation ? " echoing the American word . 

  " Is it difficult to get away when you're working ? 

  I mean , for a day like this ? " 

  " Sometimes , yes . 

  Paula is a perfectionist and everything is fine so long as there are no snags . 

  Then she can be a little difficult . " 

  " But what exactly do you do ? " 

  She smiled , turned course and steered for the deeper waters near the edge of the reef . 

  " I just run the place . 

  Everything . 

  I do not do any physical work , if that's what you mean . 

  Dusting or hoovering , " she laughed lightly . 

  " But I do have to see that the servants do everything , and since they all seem to leave as soon as they've saved up enough money , half my time is spent finding replacements and training them . 

  I have to check on everything : liquor stocks ; whether the pool filter is working ; is the garden untidy ? " 

  " Sounds tough , " I sympathised . 

  " It is not really , though I've got to watch Paula . 

  But on the other hand I get $1000 a month tax free for five months every year , and so far in three years I have not touched a cent of the money . 

  I am just about set to realise a dream . " 

  " Which is ? " 

  " I've already paid down two-thirds for an artist's cottage in Sausolito , a village across the other side of the Golden Gate bridge from San Francisco . 

  Between Mount Tamalpais and the Bay . " 

  " And then what are you going to do ? " 

  " Invite you to come and see me on your next leave , " she laughed . 

  " That's a date -- if there is not a war . " 

  " Will there be ? " 

  " Not here in the Pacific , " I said , " but in Europe -- there might be . 

  The outlook's pretty grim . " 

  It was a heavenly morning . 

  Half a mile or so out , we swam in the deep water under the lee of the conical shape of the High Island's volcano . 

  Later , we sailed out towards the reef . 

  It was an extraordinary sensation to see the thrashing , churning water on one side while , inside the lagoon a yard or two away , the water was calm . 

  It seems odd , but I was enjoying myself so much that I hardly gave a thought to the fact that we were alone , miles away from anyone , and that the average man in such a situation ... 

  But I did get another tingle of excitement when I swam a shade too near a jagged reef , and she grabbed me by the shoulder to pull me away . 

  I must have brushed my back against her breasts , but then the touch of her was over and she shouted , " How about lunch ? " 

  We swam back to the boat , I climbed up the steps fastened near the stern , and gave her a helping hand . 

  Again I had a sense of excitement as I touched her , holding her hand , then her arm , until she was on the boat , looking for a towel . 

  But within a few moments we were sipping extra-dry martinis from paper cups , then eating cold chicken and tinned ham , with beer chilled by the sea . 

  I said with a laugh " You're taking an awful risk , inviting me like this alone with you on a boat . " 

  She gave me a frank , laughing look . 

  " I know what you'd like to do -- and it may surprise you , Kit , if I admit that part of me may even want to myself . 

  But rushing things is so wrong . 

  Let us wait and see what happens , Kit . 

  Will you ? " 

  " If I must . 

  I am not a professional seducer , you know . 

  But does that mean -- ? " 

  " I hope so . 

  There , I've admitted it . 

  I hope so . 

  Just give both of us time to get our breath , so that we both feel it's worth it . 

  Do you understand ? " 

  " Not really . " 

  " Look at it this way . 

  We're not pretending that we're in love with each other . 

  We're attracted -- and that's a different emotion . " 

  As I started to protest , she said , " No , do not be hypocritical . 

  We're a healthy normal couple . 

  I've had the occasional boyfriend in the past , and I am sure you've done the same sort of thing . 

  But let us enjoy the pleasure of waiting . 

  Do not let us be seduced by the easy sexual habits of the islanders . " 

  " I suppose I do understand . " 

  As we made for home , and reached the tiny harbour of Tala-Tala , the silence between us was almost strained . 

  Neither was angry ; perhaps she , like me , was battling with secret thoughts . 

  Fortunately we had other things to occupy us as we reached the spot in the harbour where the boat was normally moored . 

  We edged in . 

  I stood ready with the boat-hook to make sure we did not bump against the rocks of the mooring . 

  A couple of the crew members from Paula's yacht , who were waiting for us , grabbed a line and made the sailing boat fast . 

  I did not want her to think I was angry or disappointed , and as I helped her ashore , I smiled and said , " I understand , " and , caught in the no-man's-land between desire and fulfilment , leant forward rather clumsily to kiss her . 

  But she avoided my lips , so that I brushed her cheek , and as I tried to find her mouth she said , " No , Kit . 

  If you kiss me , I might have to say " Yes " . " 

  Then she added , " One day , it will not be long , I think , and it will not be contrived , then I shall come knocking on your door . " 

  It was amazing how quickly the weeks passed as I settled into the routine of life on Koraloona . 

  Everything was done at a leisurely tempo . 

  Day-to-day life was governed by the pace of the inhabitants , and there was no point in running from A to B when everyone else walked slowly . 

  Yet even so , the dispensary was busy every day , and we did have a great deal of work , dealing with the humdrum , everyday ailments -- yaws , measles , " flu and accidents -- accepted by the Polynesians with a philosophical resignation , as though they were saying , " This is the price we pay for living in paradise . " 

  We had our crises too -- including deaths from the dreadful tetanus ; I had to keep records of all this in the only " office " I possessed -- the old tin trunk bequeathed to us by Tiare's mother so long ago . 

  But though busy , there was time to swim at least twice a day in warm water , fanned by warm breezes , with an average temperature the year round of between 70 and 80 Fahrenheit , and always against a magical scenic backdrop that never ceased to enchant me . 

  I felt at peace with the world , even though by the summer of 1939 Europe seemed to be drifting closer to war and everyone was glued to the BBC short-wave Overseas Service bulletins , or even devouring month-old copies of The Times which had been airmailed to Australia and sent on by ship , together with the Illustrated London News , Tatler , and particular titles ordered by the expatriates . 

  There was quite a social calendar to keep me occupied if I ever tired of my own company . 

  I met Bill Robins regularly when the Mantela docked , sometimes for lunch at Green's Hotel . 

  Once a week at least Alec Reid and I dined together . 

  I had been so horrified by Jason Purvis' physical condition that , almost unwittingly , I had taken him in hand . 

  It was no use offering him money , for he would immediately spend it on drink , but I suggested that he try his hand at very light work -- sweeping the hospital floor , later a little gardening , and for this I paid him in meals cooked by Toma at home . 

  He loved it . 

  Sometimes I managed to find stocks of surplus out-of-date doctor's forms and he used these to type out rough drafts of his latest short story or chapters of his novel on his old Remington Portable -- about the only thing he had not sold -- and occasionally he would bring one round for me to read . 

  His work was not bad , and I had the feeling that one day , if only he would persist , he might write a novel that would be published . 

  At least his latest attempt was a story on a subject which he knew about . 

  It told the story of a man who had searched for happiness on an island like Koraloona , only to be disillusioned , yet unable to tear himself away . 

  It was very good -- even though it left a nasty taste in my mouth , the same sort of shudder I felt when I first read The Turn of the Screw . 

  Was Purvis influenced by the same kind of eeriness when surrounded by beauty on this island ? 

  He launched into a long explanation , when I tackled him . 

  " It is beautiful , " he admitted . 

  " But sometimes events or thoughts or even characters take charge when you're working . 

  No , I am not being pompous . 

  After all , these islands have been steeped for centuries in everything from witchcraft to ancestor worship . 

  It's still all around us . 

  They're really about as Christian as headhunters . 

  Maybe what I cannot help bringing into some of my work is that all this beauty on Koraloona demands a price . 

  And the happier you are , the higher the price you may one day have to pay . 

  " My God ! 

  What balls I am talking , " he laughed . 

  " For God's sake give me a drink , Kit . " 

  As I poured out his fourth large Scotch , I wondered , would I too ever be disillusioned with Koraloona ? 

  So far , it was love at first sight . 

  It showed no signs of waning . 

  But sometimes there was an uneasy undercurrent to disturb the tranquillity -- including , of course , the feeling that I was marking time while great and stirring events were in the offing -- war , for instance . 

  If war broke out , would I come to regret having buried myself in some backwater while history passed me by ? 

  These were only occasional solemn thoughts , and there was one easy way to avoid any sense of boredom : go to the Villa Faalifu and see the elegant Paula Reece -- with a chance , too , of meeting Lucy . 

  Paula always held open-house cocktail parties on Tuesdays and Fridays , and if you were a friend , no invitations were required . 

  So I often popped in , sometimes alone , sometimes with Alec , for a drink after a day's work . 

  Jason came fairly regularly , and occasionally Baker too was pressed into service . 

  Once or twice Paula teased me about nude swimming , and once she gave me a brief conducted tour of the gardens and the house . 

  But not upstairs . 

  " Another time perhaps , " she suggested . 

  Upstairs included a bed large enough to sleep ten people . 

  " My fun bedroom ! " she explained . 

  But often she had men staying with her . 

  I did not actually like Paula very much -- she flaunted her wealth as though it was marked with a price tag -- but I did not actively dislike her . 

  Hard to explain the conflict in our acquaintance , but perhaps I had an instinctive feeling that she , in fact , wanted me to go to bed with her , and she knew I would not -- because if I did make love to her , it would be a victory for her and a defeat for me . 

  Lucy of course was always fun , and I talked to her at Paula's villa whenever I went there . 

  But I had to watch my step . 

  Paula's eyes could be cold and angry if she disliked something . 

  Once I was talking alone to Lucy in a corner , laughing together and , as I impulsively took one of her hands in both of mine , I heard a sharp cry of " Lucy ! 

  We need some more ice . 

  Tell that damn fool waiter to get some . " 

  And as Lucy walked into the house , Paula looked right through me . 

  Alec Reid had treated several cases of polio during my first year or so in Koraloona , but there were never any signs of an epidemic . 

  Then one day , when I visited the hospital by chance -- Alec was " on duty " -- a boy of eight arrived at the surgery , carried by his father . 

  The boy was whimpering with pain and his left leg was twisted awkwardly . 

  I thought I recognised his face , and I was right , for Alec said , " Yes , he came in with " flu symptoms about a fortnight ago . 

  I gave him the standard treatment and told him to come back immediately if he did not get better . " 

  " And he did not come back ? " 

  Alec shook his head in annoyance . 

  " They rarely do , " he said . 

  " The trouble is that even when it's a bad virus it always looks like " flu -- and remember , the polio itself dies out in about a week . 

  It's the symptoms that are left behind . 

  Look at this poor little devil now . " 

  The boy's bright face , with its wide , open eyes , was contorted in agony . 

  His twisted left leg was bent at the knee , and though the Polynesians are a stoic race , he was fighting a losing battle to stem the tears . 

  While the other patients crowded outside and Miss Sowerby tried to keep them in order , Alec motioned to the father to carry the boy into the " ops " theatre and lay him down on his back on the operating table so that we could make a more detailed examination . 

  One look was enough to confirm that this was polio , and that the delay in coming to see us probably meant that we had passed the porodomal , or incubatory stage . 

  The patient was probably already in the second stage of muscle pain , leading to the destruction of the muscle , something that could happen in as little as ten days . 

  Then I saw that the disease had also struck the right leg . 

  The muscle wastage had caused a dropped foot -- like the little girl who had been treated by Alec . 

  The boy said nothing , only looked at both of us with wide-open eyes , but there were no tears despite the pain . 

  " That left leg needs bone surgery , " said Alec as we asked the father to wait outside . 

  " He ought to go to Sanderstown right away and have an operation for arthrodesis by a proper orthopaedic surgeon . " 

  I knew that -- from his point of view -- this was the correct treatment . 

  But I had a sudden vision of poor Clare , imprisoned in irons for the rest of her life . 

  " I do not think it's necessary , Alec , " I muttered . 

  Almost as though explaining the normal techniques to a med student , he said patiently , " You know , Laddie , that what I want to do is restore the affected joint to its proper position of function . " 

  He was using standard medical terms . 

  " Especially if a muscle is wasted . 

  At least arthrodesis is an operation that will immobilise a joint so that the bones grow solidly together . " 

  " I admit that , " I said , adding bitterly , " but at what a cost ! 

  It usually results in the loss of the muscle below the bone . 

  And then it has to be supported by a brace . " 

  I looked at the little boy , lying there , and caught a glimpse of the father peeping from the corridor . 

  The father was a tall , straight-backed man , obviously proud of his suffering son . 

  What a tragedy if that son had to wear a brace for the rest of his life . 

  Impulsively -- and straight from the heart -- I said , " Give me forty-eight hours , Alec . 

  At least I am sure I can relieve the pain -- look at that poor kid ! " 

  Seeing Alec's dour expression , I added , " And it will not do any harm to let me try . " 

  " It could , and both you and I know it , Kit , " Alec replied . 

  " Come and have another look . 

  Ye ken -- " he took the boy's leg again , and with one hand raised the calf muscle below the knee . 

  " Those muscles are sagging , they're flaccid , and the whole leg is being pulled out of its true shape by the strong muscles surrounding them . 

  The leg must be operated on and straightened , then put into splints or plaster , or the kid'll remain in that crippled position for the rest of his life . 

  Aye , I know that the calf muscles will atrophy , but at least they can be supported by a brace and the boy'll be able to walk . " 

  " Only with sticks ! " 

  I said sharply . 

  " And anyway , I do not think the muscles are flaccid . " 

  I paused . 

  " At least they might not be . 

  The pain is being caused by spasms -- like sudden bursts of uncontrollable cramp . 

  It's agony . 

  Look at the sweat on that little boy's twisted face . 

  And there's no proof that the boy's muscles are completely dead . 

  Do not you think we should give him the benefit of the doubt ? " 

  " There is nae doot -- and you know it , " said Alec , not unkindly . 

  " I know how you feel -- your sister's problems -- and the fact that you saw this Australian woman perform a kind of miracle . 

  But you have to bear in mind that we are doctors , and as such we should really do what we're trained to do -- and are expected to do . " 

  " I know all that , " I began to feel angry and frustrated , " but Goddammit , the only reason I came to this island was because of my interest in polio . 

  Yet so far I seem to have been treating nothing worse than chicken pox and " flu . 

  I know I am right . 

  You cannot just ignore the fact that people have been cured -- all right , I agree , they are unorthodox methods . 

  But give me a chance . 

  Have some faith in me -- in what I believe in . " 

  Suddenly remembering a casual conversation , I cried , " Miss Sowerby ! 

  Can you spare a moment ? " 

  She came in through the corridor , shuffling in her thick black clothes . 

  Without waiting , I asked her , " You told me once that you'd seen Sister Kenny treat a polio patient . " 

  It was one of the rare occasions when her tight-lipped mouth opened into something approaching a smile . 

  " It was a miracle ! " 

  She was speaking to us both . 

  " I never saw anything like it . 

  She came to one of our mission hospitals when I was training in Australia . " 

  " So you'd know how to help me with the treatment -- if Doctor Reid allows us . " 

  " Yes , Doctor , I would . 

  And I hope you can do something for this little lad here . 

  Look at him -- the pain . 

  " I caught sight of the boy , trapped in an uncontrollable spasm of painful cramp , and I smiled , took one hand , stroked his face , wet with sweat , and said , " Be patient and brave . " 

  " You did not tell me this , " said Alec to Miss Sowerby . 

  " Never thought to mention it , " she retorted , po-faced again . 

  " I may be old-fashioned , " Alec sighed , " but I hate experimenting in a lonely spot like this . " 

  " We're not experimenting , Alec , " I cried , my voice filled with passion , " we're believing -- Miss Sowerby and me . 

  Yes , even Miss Sowerby -- " and breaking the tension I smiled to her and said , " Sorry about the " even " . " 

  " Well . " 

  I could see that Alec was hesitating . 

  " If anything does go wrong -- " 

  " You're not afraid of a report on unprofessional conduct ? 

  If you are , I shall sign now that I've tried this treatment without your approval . " 

  For a moment another thought crossed my mind -- that if I lived in the United States while undertaking an " experiment " I might be sued if I failed . 

  " Remember , Alec , the doctor in London who gave me the job did say Koraloona was a living laboratory for the treatment of polio . 

  Do let me have a chance to prove what I believe in . " 

  " I did promise to give you that chance , " he admitted . 

  " But it's on your own head . 

  And if you fail -- you shall have a cripple for life on your conscience . " 

  " Can you promise that the boy will not be a cripple for life anyway ? " 

  He shook his head . 

  " All right -- go ahead , " he said quietly . 

  " And if there's anything you need -- " To Miss Sowerby he said , " Give Doctor Masters all the help he requires while he tries this new treatment . " 

  Miss Sowerby nodded -- and not with pursed lips . 

  " Thank you , Alec , " I said , and to Miss Sowerby , " You know the drill ? " 

  " Only vaguely . 

  You tell me again what to do . " 

  First I went to find the boy's father and told him , " There's nothing you can do by staying here . 

  Go home to your village . 

  I will keep your son here -- and I hope , cure him . " 

  " I will stay , " he insisted . 

  " There's no place here . " 

  I waved vaguely around the hospital . 

  " It's empty now , but it's crowded every morning . 

  And you cannot help . " 

  Alec overheard the conversation , and said , " I am going back to the house now , Kit . 

  You do not need me for the moment , but I shall be back this afternoon . 

  Meanwhile you , " he turned to the father , " stay along and garden my house . 

  " With a sigh he turned to me , and said , " Sometimes doctors forget that fathers who love their bairns suffer as much pain of a different sort as the children . 

  Poor man . " 

  " You're a good friend , Alec . " 

  I returned to the ops room ready to start work . 

  I knew what I wanted to do , and first of all I asked Miss Sowerby , " Any spare blankets ? " 

  I knew we must have a store of old army-type blankets for use when patients ran temperatures yet their teeth chattered during bouts of fever -- malarial or dengue . 

  She nodded . 

  " Fetch me a couple to start with , please . 

  And get me some large surgery scissors . 

  Then boil up a big pan of water . " 

  I went to try to soothe the agony of the little boy , stretched on his back , one leg bent upwards , the other flat , with the foot dropping . 

  " What's your name ? " 

  I asked , mopping his face with some tepid water -- the coldest I could find . 

  He muttered a reply , but I could not understand what he said . 

  " Jimmabibi ? " 

  I asked . 

  He managed a shake of his head . 

  " Jimbo ? " 

  It probably was not , but he was in too much pain to argue , so he nodded , and immediately became Jimbo . 

  I had to think carefully now -- if only to remember the exact procedure . 

  It had been running through my thoughts so often that I knew it by heart , yet now I was suddenly afraid that I might do the wrong thing ! 

  For this was not a treatment to be found in Gray's Anatomy . 

  First , while the water was boiling , I had to find some piece of stout wood to hold the boy's dropped foot in the proper position -- " the position of function " as Reid had called it . 

  If I did not , then that could mean an operation for a dropped foot . 

  But where the hell could I find a large straight , flat piece of wood ? 

  There was not a hope in the hospital . 

  I rummaged around , asked Miss Sowerby , but there was nothing . 

  " I shall run down the hill and see if Jim Wilson's got anything at the ship's chandler , " I said to Miss Sowerby . 

  It was only three minutes down the road , and Jim always had a storehouse of odds and ends . 

  Sure enough he came up with the perfect solution . 

  " How about this old door ? " 

  He pointed out a flat , tough door from which he had already removed the hinges and nails . 

  It was just what I needed to do the job of calf muscle for Jimbo . 

  " Perfect ! 

  Can you spare it ? " 

  I asked him . 

  " Of course . 

  I shall run you up in the car . 

  Only take a couple of minutes . " 

  " One thing more , Jim , " I added . 

  " Have you any elastic bands ? " 

  He shook his head . 

  " Better try Johnson's . " 

  I ran down the road , bought a packet of large-sized bands and told Johnson to put them on my account . 

  " Funny thing to ask for on an island like this . " 

  He had come out of his cubbyhole of an office , adding with a trace of Cockney twang , " This ai n't no place for sending parcels ! " 

  I still could not fathom why I did not altogether trust the man , " I must be off , " I muttered and returned to lim . 

  By the time I arrived he had loaded the door on his truck , and I drove up with him . 

  Once back in the ops room , I laid the boy flat on his back , so far down the mattress that his dropped foot hung over the edge at the bottom , just as I had seen the Australian nurse do when I watched her during her London visit the previous year . 

  Then I stood the door across the end of the bed , so close that Jimbo's right , dropping foot , where the muscle was not holding , had no room to drop . 

  His right foot had to remain at right angles to his leg . 

  It cost him no effort , no extra pain . 

  The old door , strategically placed , was doing the work of the muscle . 

  When I had made him as comfortable as I could -- a relative term , since he was in pain with each new spasm -- I cut the two blankets into strips , each one two feet or so wide . 

  I then cut each strip into rectangular pieces , two feet by one . 

  I was ready now , for the water had boiled while I was away . 

  " Take these , please . " 

  I handed Miss Sowerby half a dozen of the strips . 

  " Now , the water's boiling , put them inside . 

  And give me a pair of tongs so that I can take one out of the water at a time . " 

  The strong-smelling " stewed " strips of blanket were hot , and as I wrung out the excess water , I needed tongs to hold them for the first few minutes . 

  Yet when I placed the first hot pad on to the boy's twisted left leg he seemed not to feel any pain ; I supposed the pain of the spasms had made him impervious to a lesser pain . 

  I wrapped one strip around the twisted knee , then a second over the calf muscles below , keeping them in place with the elastic bands . 

  I did the same with another strip around the right ankle and over the foot , so that it was held between the sole of the foot and the wooden backing of the old door . 

  But where the muscles had started to waste was the most important part , and so I asked Miss Sowerby for another square of cloth to reinforce the heat over the ankle . 

  My theory -- " mine " , I say , but the miracle had been wrought in front of me by Sister Kenny -- was very simple . 

  Though medical science believed that the muscles affected by polio simply withered and could not be restored , she was convinced that the deformities which followed attacks of infantile paralysis were caused by muscle spasms . 

  I believed this too . 

  I felt -- I could not be more certain than that -- that when I had treated polio cases on previous occasions I had actually sensed wasting muscles making slight quivers , contracting with the pain of a spasm ; and it was these contractions of muscles which , following normal treatment , so often caused shortening of the leg when the muscles withered . 

  I know it sounds crazy , but even as I watched this little boy , Jimbo , I thought I could actually see a muscle quiver . 

  " Now , young man . " 

  Knowing that he would speak a little pidgin English , I said to him , " You trust me , yes ? 

  This hot cloth help ease pain , and we put a new hot one on every two hours until the pain has gone completely . " 

  I do not imagine that he felt any easier immediately I applied the hot blankets , but suggestion is a powerful weapon in the armoury of the doctor , and he did at least manage a smile . 

  " Do not expect a miracle , " I smiled back . 

  " How long did you say you're going to keep this compress on ? " 

  Miss Sowerby asked . 

  " A couple of hours . " 

  " And then , Doctor ? " 

  " Same again . 

  With blankets heated by being wrung out after immersion in boiling water . " 

  Just then Alec Reid unexpectedly bustled in from the dispensary . 

  " I thought I'd just pop in . 

  How's it going ? " he asked . 

  After taking off his topee and wiping his head , he felt the boy's pulse automatically . 

  I suddenly realised that he was very , very interested . 

  " Early days . 

  But I've put the first hot foments on the two affected parts , " I explained . 

  " Actually on the spots where the spasms occurred -- and I am planning to change them -- new ones , very hot ones , every couple of hours . " 

  " For how long ? " asked Alec . 

  " Three or four days , " I said hopefully , trying to hide any element of self-doubt . 

  " And who's going to do that -- every two hours , twenty-four hours a day ? " 

  Alec looked incredulous . 

  " Who's going to keep awake for three days or more ? 

  Eh ? " 

  " Alec , " I said , a little desperately , " I've got to do it the only way I know how to . 

  Just to see if it works . 

  I shall get Toma , my boy , to bring in an alarm clock , or whatever . 

  If it does not work because I cannot carry the experiment through " -- I shrugged my shoulders -- " it would not be worth starting on . 

  But I am sure it will -- sure . 

  Only a few minutes ago I felt a slight twitch in the boy's calf muscle . 

  Yet according to you it's supposed to be dead already and wasting away -- " 

  Alec was staring at me hard . 

  " It could have been involuntary . " 

  " True . 

  But it might not have been . 

  And I have to believe in that " might " . 

  There's life in there , I tell you , Alec . 

  As I've explained , I am going to change the hot strips of blanket every two hours all through the night . 

  And tomorrow . 

  To hell with sleep -- " 

  " It's against all medical teaching , " he said . 

  " I know , but -- " 

  " I shall come in early -- four o'clock tomorrow morning ? " 

  Miss Sowerby offered . 

  " You will ? 

  That's marvellous . 

  You've seen us at work . 

  You're part of the experiment . 

  It's imperative to keep the treatment going . 

  And then we will see -- if we can get rid of the muscle spasms , if the pain stops , then I shall go to work on the muscles . " 

  " How ? " she asked . 

  " Massage . 

  Some manipulation , I dare say , but gentle massage -- and then , once the spasms and the pain have gone , Jimbo will be so grateful that I shall easily be able to persuade him to start his own passive exercises . " 

  " And you think it will work ? " 

  Alec was still finding it hard to hide his disbelief . 

  " Honestly , I do not know . 

  I only saw that one demonstration . 

  But she cured that child . " 

  " Getting rid of the pain is one thing , " said Alec . 

  " I can see how heat , regularly applied , could alleviate that . 

  But that's only a palliative . " 

  " Maybe that's all I shall be able to do , " I admitted . 

  " But surely that's something -- to a little boy in agony . 

  But you see , the trouble with polio is that once the muscles are dead the nerves which serve them are useless . " 

  At the risk of sounding pompous -- for this was very basic medicine -- I thought I ought to explain to Miss Sowerby just what I was thinking of . 

  " You see , " I turned to her . 

  " In the end it's the muscles that take orders from the brain if they're to work . 

  And the nerve pathways are the messengers between brain and muscle . 

  Once the pain and muscle soreness disappears I shall have to try and restore any muscles that might be in danger -- and in doing that restore the nerve routes -- the circuits , if you like -- that link muscle and brain . " 

  " Will not we need a trained nurse ? " she asked . 

  " We're experimenting , Miss Sowerby . 

  I know little more than you do about what we're doing . " 

  I knew that would please her , and it did . 

  " I see two stages ahead , " I went on . 

  " Once the pains are alleviated , Jimbo , as well as us , will have won a supreme victory , especially if he is not deformed . 

  You and I shall have to start passive exercises . " 

  I knew exactly how I would do this and explained in some detail , finding Alec Reid equally fascinated . 

  Whoever was on duty would move gently any part of the affected limb , trying as they did so to persuade Jimbo that now the pain was gone he might -- I did not dare to say " would " -- be free soon to walk normally . 

  But I knew that it would be difficult to persuade Jimbo that he had to work at the exercises : yet if the treatment were to succeed , it had to be him -- Jimbo himself -- who , in the end , would reopen the pathway of nerves between brain and muscle . 

  " And that's out of my hands , " I said . 

  All of this was in the hours ahead , for I was now to live through one of the toughest three days and nights I ever experienced . 

  I moved my pyjamas , spare underclothes , a couple of shirts and a few other necessaries from my bungalow and stayed in the hospital bed next to Jimbo's , snatching sleep and meals when Miss Sowerby took over . 

  When , that first night , she went to her own bungalow , I was left mostly on my own , though Alec came in early in the evening to lend a hand . 

  Alec Reid was wonderful -- not only physically , carrying pans of hot water to the stove when necessary , but morally , in allowing me to treat a patient in such an unorthodox fashion . 

  I was dropping with fatigue -- mainly because I could not sleep , even for two hours between treatments . 

  Subconsciously I was terrified of missing my two-hourly deadline . 

  I would dip blanket after blanket in boiling water , wring them out almost without realising that I was scalding myself , take off the old strips of saturated cloth , wrap the new ones round each leg and tuck them into the corners of affected muscles , but half the time not really knowing what I was doing . 

  Yet , despite the desperate fatigue and the fear that I might be making a fool of myself , I was seized with a curious elation that kept me going . 

  For there was no doubt about one thing -- after only twenty-four hours the pain was ending . 

  The spasms had gone . 

  Earlier on there had been one or two screams , but no more . 

  And I knew from experience that in the ten to fourteen days during wastage of muscle tissue prior to an operation , a patient should normally suffer intense pain almost every hour of every one of those days . 

  It seemed to me that the hot compresses had not only prevented the pain , but had done so because there must be living matter there which was capable of being alleviated by pain . 

  In other words , it was not the spasms that had ended and with it the pain , but the muscle wastage itself . 

  One of the vital things I had to do -- and I was too tired to help him myself -- was to keep Jimbo occupied . 

  As the pain decreased , his restlessness increased . 

  It was also essential that he believed he was being cured , because of the need he would face soon for what I can only call " self-help " . 

  I telephoned to the Union Jack Club asking for help , explaining the " miracle " that seemed about to occur . 

  And Mrs Fawcett came rushing up to the hospital with the perfect solution : she lent me a battery-operated portable radio . 

  " It does not have a long range , " she said , " but it will get the dance music in Sanderstown . " 

  " Mrs Fawcett , you're an angel . " 

  I think she actually blushed a little . 

  " Tell me when you next want me to make a four at bridge , and if it's possible , I shall be there . " 

  Jimbo loved the radio . 

  He was stunned to find that if he turned a knob , music came out of the tiny speaker , and he never stopped playing with it . 

  On the third day , unshaven and too tired even to eat , I was examining Jimbo while Alec was in the middle of his sick parade . 

  Suddenly I cried out , " Alec : Come and see this . 

  Quick ! 

  Before it disappears ! " 

  He came running in from the dispensary , pulling up his trousers , still held up by his MCC tie , the end of his stethoscope bouncing off his fat tummy . 

  " Look ! " 

  I cried . 

  " Look at that muscle tendon . 

  It's supposed to be dead , but it cannot be because -- look ! the tendon is moving slightly , the muscle's quivering . 

  Just feel it . " 

  Very carefully , as though handling a precious object , Alec stroked the affected calf muscle , then took out his handkerchief , wiped his bald pate and said softly , " Laddie , it's a bloody miracle . " 

  Even better , the left leg was now lying flat on the bed in a more comfortable position . 

  One of the problems with polio is that the spasms of pain often cause a patient to twist his limb involuntarily into a crippled position and it becomes locked there . 

  That is why surgery is needed to straighten it out as the muscle no longer responds . 

  But now Jimbo was lying on his back , with his left leg almost flat on the bed . 

  " This makum better , " he pointed to the radio , convinced that it was the radio -- not the doctor -- which was going to make him walk again ! 

  At the end of the fourth day , after hours of gentle massage by Miss Sowerby and myself , I went to bed for a full night's sleep , Miss Sowerby taking over as " night nurse " . 

  I slept with only one dream , exulting in the thought that if I could do this , why should not I one day try to do something to help Clare to walk more easily ? 

  But Clare was ten thousand miles away , I was thinking as I woke up , while Toma made fresh coffee and cooked me a man-sized breakfast of local bacon-cum-ham and two of the island's tiny eggs . 

  Perhaps one day I would go back to London , and take up my career where I had left off . 

  The next day , after sick parade , I said to Alec , " Let us have a look at the right dropped foot . " 

  As he watched , I started to drag away the old door that had served us so well as foot-stopper . 

  " Remember , " I reminded him , " that his foot has only been held up by the pressure of that piece of wood . 

  There's no mattress underneath the ankle . " 

  Even Alec could not believe the transformation . 

  The ankle muscles were holding the foot in an almost normal position -- oblivious to the fact that the joints had nothing to rest on , that this was a classic case of a boy who would normally have ended up with a club foot . 

  " It's astonishing , that's for sure . " 

  Alec scratched his head , then examined the right ankle carefully . 

  " There's only the slightest malfunction of the foot muscles , " he agreed . 

  " I shall put the restraining board back for a couple of days longer , " I suggested . 

  " Just so that we do not overtax young Jimbo's powers of resistance . " 

  I rumpled his dark curly hair but gave him a firm " No " when he asked , " If I play radio louder , me get better more quickly ? " 

  " Let us hope that's the end of any blanket-brewing , " said Alec , in good humour . 

  " I never realised what a sour stink wet blankets can make . 

  " Patting me on the back , he added , " I am proud of ye , Laddie . 

  And you've done me proud too . " 

  " We're on the way , " I thanked him , " but we will need all the boy's help in getting a permanent cure . " 

  Though I already felt confident of that . 

  Sure enough , after a week or so the boy's right ankle was responding to more treatment , and the left-leg calf muscles were quivering . 

  I knew we were winning the real battle -- a permanent cure -- after one particular moment I shall never forget . 

  I had been trying to produce in Jimbo the necessary mental awareness that the real cure -- the reopening of the nerve pathways -- lay in the end with him . 

  It was hard to explain to a youngster who was bright but not particularly well educated that I could not make a nerve work . 

  He had to do it himself . 

  Miss Sowerby -- by now an enthusiastic convert -- and I had taken turns at massaging the damaged calf muscles , and suddenly I said to him , " Jimbo , just imagine it's you that's making the muscles move . " 

  I used the word " move " because I did not think he would understand " quiver " . 

  He smiled , the dulled eyes of pain now sparkling with the happiness of being alive , and I added , " Go on ! 

  You bloody lazy ! 

  Me fed up , doing the work . 

  You do it . " 

  It was a magical moment . 

  I suddenly felt , under my hands , a few quivers of the muscle . 

  I had done nothing . 

  Jimbo himself had made the one effort that only a patient can make . 

  I knew from that moment that it was only a question of time -- and perseverance on his part -- before he would be completely cured . 

  I looked up in triumph -- to witness an astonishing sight . 

  The dour , austere Miss Sowerby was wiping her eyes with a handkerchief she had tucked under a sleeve . 

  She was crying gently -- tears of happiness . 

  " Miss Sowerby ! " 

  I put an arm over her bony shoulder , and she did not draw back . 

  " I know how you feel . 

  It's wonderful . " 

  " A miracle . " 

  " Did your father believe in miracles ? " 

  I asked , in fact to stop the flow of tears , to hide any embarrassment she might feel . 

  " Yes , he did . 

  He was a good , upright missionary , but like so many Victorians , so stern . " 

  She sighed and composed herself . 

  " And as a little girl , " the faintest shadow of a smile touched her face , " I was always naughty and disobedient , and so , under Father's guidance , I learned to control myself -- all my emotions -- for the greater good of serving the Lord . 

  And now I've given way to my emotions when I swore to my father I never would . 

  I am so ashamed . " 

  " Nonsense . 

  It's a good thing to let yourself go , " I said cheerfully . 

  " This is a great occasion , and it would never have been possible without your help . 

  You should not be so strict with yourself . 

  People can do great good in the world and still smile . 

  May I ask you a question -- as a doctor to his invaluable assistant ? " 

  She sniffed , hesitated and then mumbled apprehensively , " I suppose so . " 

  " Have you ever been in love ? " 

  With a blush she asked , " With -- a man ? " 

  I nodded . 

  " Never ! " she cried . 

  " And I will never allow such a thing to happen . " 

  " And another question -- from your doctor . 

  How old are you , Miss Sowerby ? " 

  I was thinking in terms of between thirty-five and forty-five . 

  It was impossible to be more precise than that . 

  She blushed again , and said , " I do not think -- " 

  " Well , as a doctor to his most trusted assistant -- " I smiled . 

  Finally , after what was obviously some soul-searching , she said in a barely audible whisper , " Twenty-nine . " 

  Astonished , I cried , " Miss Sowerby , you ought to be ashamed of yourself , masquerading under false pretences . 

  Twenty-nine indeed ! 

  You're little more than a girl . 

  Why do you try to look so old ? " 

  " I feel old , " she said and , the tears dried , she walked away . 

  EDITORIAL 

  Well , summer is well and truly with us -- though as I write I cannot decide whether to pack my industrial strength waterproofs or my total block sun cream when I go off to the Peak District this weekend . 

  Whatever the weather throws up though , I know I am in for some good walking . 

  The Peak District is a favourite walking area of mine . 

  I got to know it pretty well when I was living in Sheffield and I'd recommend anyone to take a walking holiday there . 

  In fact there are so many great areas to take a walking holiday in the UK , it can be hard to decide exactly where to go . 

  So with summer holiday time coming up we thought we'd help the late planners among you with a few ideas on great areas to go walking . 

  We asked six of our regular writers to tell us about their favourite walking areas in the UK . 

  They've chosen quite a diversity of places , from wild and lonely Wester Ross to the spectacular north Cornish coast . 

  Turn to page 14 to see which takes your fancy . 

  When I was asking them which was their favourite area , not unsurprisingly a couple of them mentioned the Lake District -- anytime except in the summer holidays . 

  I cannot say I blame them -- for many of us walking is about getting away from the crowds , and summer in the Lakes is not quite the time to do that . 

  But I am trying to work out when I can walk Paul Buttle's circuit of the Lakes , devised especially for Outdoor Action . 

  I think it's a brilliant idea because it's so flexible . 

  The whole thing takes around 12 days to complete and takes in all the best Lakeland peaks , but the beauty of it is that it can be divided into any number of day sections and there's always a lowland alternative route in case the weather is really awful on the tops . 

  All details of public transport and local accommodation are included as well as route details . 

  Part one featuring the first four days of the route is on page 18 and we will be publishing parts two and three in our August and September issues , so September might be a good time to do the whole thing -- if you can wait that long . 

  Looks like it's going to be a very full summer ahead ! 

  WHAT'S ON 

  OUTDOOR EVENTS 

  If something's going on in your neck of the woods , we want to hear about it . 

  Send your event details two months in advance to 

  Walking in the Lakes 

  July 6 , 12 , 19 , 26 . 

  There are four opportunities to discover the beautiful countryside of the Lake District on a free guided walk organised by the national park . 

  Each Sunday a voluntary park warden will lead the way on a six hour walk to Silver How . 

  The walks will start at 10.30am and last for around six hours . 

  Meet at the Grasmere Information Centre and bring a packed lunch . 

  For more information about the walks contact . 

  Biking in Calderdale 

  July 5 and 19 . 

  The event on the fifth is aimed at teaching beginners biking skills and how they can enjoy more the Calderdale area on their bike . 

  This event will also give advice about equipment , routes and safety and will involve trying out new skills on a cycle orienteering course . 

  Bring your own bike , a helmet and lunch . 

  This event costs 4 and the price includes a south Pennines OS map . 

  You need to book in advance . 

  Contact : . 

  On the 19th there are two free guided rides -- one in the morning , one in the afternoon -- in the north-west of Calderdale . 

  You need to book in advance but not until after July 9 . 

  Sailing in Yorkshire 

  July 24 and 31 . 

  Beginners have two chances to learn the basics of dinghy sailing in separate events organised by the North York Moors National Park . 

  Both events take place at the Scaling Dam Sailing Club , where qualified instructors will help you master the basics of the sport . 

  You must be over 12 to take part and confident in the water . 

  Wear trainers , warm clothing and waterproofs and do not forget to bring a packed lunch and a change of clothes . 

  The event costs 12.50 and must be booked in advance . 

  To book your place call the Moors Centre on between 10am and 5pm . 

  Walking in Northumberland 

  July 11 . 

  A fine farmhouse tea awaits those who complete this medium paced walk in the unique Cheviot landscape of Northumberland . 

  The walk is suitable for all the family and places must be booked in advance . 

  The walk lasts for three hours and starts from the car park of Middleton Hall , two miles south of Wooler ( ) . 

  Price : 4 for adults , 3.25 for OAPS and 2.75 for children/ UB40s . 

  Contact : to book your place . 

  Activity event in Perthshire 

  July 10-12 . 

  Head to the beautiful banks of Loch Tay in Scotland for a non-stop weekend of exciting activities to raise funds for the Telethon Appeal . 

  To take part you can either go on your own or form a team of eight . 

  Each competitor will participate for around three hours in events including river rafting and a mystery challenge . 

  There is a 10 entry fee and each participant should raise 50 in sponsorship in order to take part . 

  There will also be live music , celebrities , watersports and barbecues . 

  For more information or to obtain a booking form contact : 

  Guided walk in Yorkshire 

  July 28 . 

  Discover the dramatic scenery of the Yorkshire Dales on a guided walk designed for all the family to enjoy -- it's part of a series of family walks organised by the national park called Going Places . 

  This walk is leisurely paced and covers between three and five miles through the stunning countryside of Wensleydale . 

  There will be various activities to keep the children amused along the way . 

  Contact : . 

  For details of other Going Places walks contact . 

  JULY DIARY DATES 

  4 See birds , bats and moths on a circular evening walk around the dykes , grazing marshes and peaceful waters of Horsey Mere in the Norfolk Broads . 8pm to 10pm from Horsey Mill car park . 

  Wear wellies or stout footwear . 

  4 Six hour discovery walk via little Langdale and Blea Tarn in the Lake District National Park . 

  Optional pub lunch and opportunity for farmhouse tea afterwards . 

  Seven and a half mile route . 

  5 Wildflower walk on the chalk grassland of the Downs . 

  Starts 2pm from the car park of the Red Lion pub at the east end of Compton in Berks . 

  9 A late evening walk to search for glow worms in Folkestone . 

  8.30pm to 11.30pm . 

  Starts from East Cliff Pavilion , 

  11 Three hour walk to the lost valley of Clicket in Exmoor . 

  Starts 2pm from Timberscombe 

  11 North Tyne Bike Hike . 

  A 12 mile cycle tour starting from Hawkhope to the Holt , returning via the pub at Falstone . 

  Hire a bike or bring your own . 

  Bookings only . 

  12 Free guided walk to Goosey Foot Tarn in the Lake District . 

  Starts 10.30am for two and a half hours . 

  12 Conservation day at Colden Clough , Calderdale . 

  Bookable after July 3 . 

  12 Learn how to use a map and compass on a beginners' Pathfinder day organised by the Yorkshire Dales National Park . 

  Involves indoor tuition before practising skills in the countryside . 

  18 Overnight expedition organised by Northumberland National Park . 

  Starts 8pm with a torchlight walk in the Cheviot foothills , then greeting the sunrise on Old Fawdon Hill . 

  Bivvy bags and snacks essential . 

  Poorly equipped people will be turned away . 

  Starts at Ingram Bridge car park at 8pm . 

  19 The Wansfell Round -- a scenic six hour walk in the Lake District . 

  Starts 10.30am . 

  21 Orienteering event at Sutherland Lodge , Pickering organised by the North York Moors National Park . 

  23 Mountain Biking event organised by the North York Moors National Park , 10am to 1pm and 1.30pm to 4pm from the Moors Centre , Danby . 

  26 Three mile walk in the secluded South Foreland valley of East Kent , looking for butterflies and wild flowers . 

  Starts 2pm from St Margaret's Bay car park next to Coastguard pub . 

  LETTERS &amp;amp; QUERIES 

  Got any problems ? 

  Something you want to get off your chest ? 

  Anything going on in the outdoors which interests , irritates or simply makes you laugh ? 

  If so I'd like to hear from you . 

  I shall do my best to answer any questions on the outdoors and to let you have your say , so there's no time to waste -- get scribbling now . 

  Write to me . 

  WIN A LOWE DAYSACK 

  Each month the writer of the best letter published wins this super Lowe Alpine Walkabout 25 daysack 

  COUNTRYSIDE UNDER SIEGE 

  This month's prize-winning letter writer is PA Widdows of Heacham in Norfolk . 

  Following the ongoing story of access on the Letterewe estate , perhaps other readers share similar experiences to ours in Heacham , where we feel we are virtually a village under siege . 

  We are situated on the Norfolk coast of the Wash , and a very pleasant situation it would be , if only we could enjoy it . 

  To the west there are several very large caravan parks . 

  Two years ago a large building company bought up the remaining fields between the sites and the village and filled them with retirement homes . 

  To the west of the caravan sites , owners of caravans and beach huts have tried to close off an access road along the back of the sea defences . 

  Development of a beach club and boat park complex , which again will not be used by the majority of villagers , now threatens to re-route a public right of way . 

  To the north east , the route of the old railway track and the fields around are owned by an outsider . 

  There's no access here , mainly because of shooting parties from what I have seen . 

  To the south-west , owners of beach holiday homes are trying to claim new beach thrown up by the latest sea defence scheme and to prevent non-owners from walking along the top of the beach . 

  They have previously tried , unsuccessfully , to prevent access through their area to a coastal park beyond . 

  To the south , a large estate has closed off a public right of way because of vandalism in the woods where pheasant are bred for shooting . 

  Estate land swings round in a crescent to the east , up to the A19 . 

  This road is solid with unyielding traffic for the duration of the holiday season . 

  The remaining land between the estate and the village is under threat by a builder who wants to put hundreds of houses on it . 

  Forbidden Britain ? 

  I suggest you come and look at us . 

  You might just make it -- if you know someone with a balloon ! 

  IN DEFENCE OF ARMY LAND USE 

  I am writing in response to the letter from Gordon Lewis about the Ministry of Defence in your May edition . 

  Firstly , it is not the object of the army to damage or destroy the countryside . 

  In fact during my time in the army I learnt to enjoy and respect it . 

  Secondly , not all of the areas that the MoD use are no-go areas to civilians . 

  The army do have to train though . 

  Maybe Mr Lewis would like to be allowed to walk in the country alongside the army in training ? -- more fool him . 

  Usually , only when very dangerous activities , such as live ammunition training , are taking place are the public barred from the area . 

  This is not done to annoy the public but to ensure their safety . 

  The idea of putting the army on an island is preposterous . 

  No two areas of the country are alike and it is vital that our troops are experienced in fighting on every kind of terrain . 

  One island would not suffice . 

  Mr Lewis seemed angry that he could not enjoy his freedom in the country due to the army -- but he would not be able to enjoy his freedom at all , if it were not for the army . 

  Maybe other irate walkers would bear that in mind the next time they see the army out on an exercise . 

  WHAT NEXT ? 

  I was horrified to read in your June issue that there is a plan afoot to erect concrete seats on Ben Nevis . 

  How on earth can people justify such a scheme ? 

  If people need a rest on the way what's wrong with sitting on the ground ? 

  Before long they will be wanting to tarmac the path or build a chairlift to the top . 

  A PERFECT FIT 

  I wanted to thank you for the wonderful pair of walking boots -- a prize from the February issue of Outdoor Action . 

  They are super and a perfect fit . 

  I am sure they will bring me many hours of enjoyment . 

  Q 

  I am interested in working for the Forestry Commission , for a national park or getting a job which involves caring for any aspect of the environment . 

  I am 28 and have no qualifications . 

  What qualifications would I need and how should I go about finding a job ? 

  A 

  There are a number of routes you could take if you want to work in a job where you shall be looking after the countryside . 

  The best thing to do is to find out exactly what kinds of jobs are available in the general field and decide which ones would best suit you . 

  Some will require you to go on various training courses , for others practical experience is what counts . 

  A good place to start your research is by buying a copy of the book Careers Working Outdoors by Judith Humphries published by Kogan Page , priced 5.99 . 

  It gives details of a host of outdoor jobs including those in forestry and conservation . 

  It is available in bookshops and by mail order from : Make cheques payable to Kogan Page Ltd and add 1 to the book price for postage costs . 

  Most employers in the field of conservation rate practical experience very highly . 

  It shows you are committed to environmental work . 

  Contact the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers . 

  They will give you details of very cheap conservation holidays as well as details of local conversation volunteer groups . 

  Local wildlife trusts are always looking for volunteers too . 

  To find out which is your local group get in touch with RSNC , . 

  Q 

  Can you please let me know if , and where , I can get a replacement part for a Super Scorpion Mark I Stove ? 

  The one I have needs a new connector which screws onto the gas cylinder . 

  If it is of any help the stove came complete with an Epigas cylinder . 

  A 

  You can get hold of the part you need -- the valve -- from a company called Outdoor Pursuits Services . 

  Write to them , explaining what you need , at or phone them on . 

  The valve will cost you 4.75 . 

  Make your cheque out to Outdoor Pursuits Services . 

  SCOTTISH NEWS 

  ANGER OVER PLANS FOR " CUILLIN CAFE " 

  Rennie McOwan reports on walkers' outrage at plans to develop the beautiful shoreline at Glen Brittle in Skye 

  Anger is growing among hill trampers in Scotland over controversial plans to build a restaurant at the foot of the Cuillin mountain range on the island of Skye . 

  The MacLeod Estate proposes to build not only a 50-seat restaurant , but an exhibition centre and a shop , on the empty shoreline at Glen Brittle . 

  Over 100 planning objections have already come from mountaineers and walkers . 

  Glen Brittle already has a youth hostel and a campsite , and in the height of the season the single track road to the shore can barely cope with the number of climbers and tourist cars using it . 

  Yet the glen and surrounding areas manage to keep a " wild " appearance . 

  Many feel that this wild appearance would be severely diluted if the new scheme were to go ahead . 

  The area is officially classed as a National Scenic Area . 

  The old Countryside Commission for Scotland , which became part of Scottish natural Heritage in April , has already lodged an objection to the new development . 

  The British Mountaineering Council has called the plan " a blight on the landscape " . 

  A public inquiry may be held . 

  As Outdoor Action goes to press , the details of the scheme have not all been made public . 

  And Highland Regional Council , which is considering the application , is still seeking further information . 

  It is startling to discover that many outdoor organisations are unaware of this proposal . 

  Action is needed straight away . 

  Objections so far have come from the much respected W H Murray , former president of the Scottish Mountaineering Club , who says " From a mountaineering viewpoint , Glen Brittle is one of the most important places in Scotland . 

  I am totally against the development which would spoil its natural beauty " . 

  The grand old man of the Scottish mountains , author and TV star Tom Weir , said he was sad about the plan . 

  " The Cuillin is the best small mountain range in the world , the hills have a unique atmosphere and Glen Brittle is part of that experience " . 

  Rennie McOwan has been hillwalking in Scotland for over 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors 

  Saving woods 

  Now for the good news . 

  Fifteen projects designed to restore areas of native woodland in the Highlands are being financed by the North West Region of Scottish natural Heritage . 

  Areas of native pinewood , birch and mixed woodland are being fenced off to exclude sheep and deer , and to assist regeneration . 

  These native woodlands support many more wild flowers and bird species than do areas of conifer forestry . 

  The fences will stand for 20 years and be removed when the task is done . 

  The cost of the projects is 250,000 . 

  One of the most encouraging aspects of all this is that each project is undertaken because of management agreements reached between SNH , landowners , crofters , farmers or voluntary organisations involved with Sites of Special Scientific Interest . 

  For those who care about beauty in our hills this is all excellent news . 

  If you are concerned about Scottish woodlands , why not join one of the Scottish Conservation Projects working parties ? 

  Volunteers in Knapdale , in south Argyll , have helped to remove sitka spruce and invasive rhododendrons from oak woods . 

  And dragonfly flight corridors have been created by providing open space on the sides of burns . 

  Other volunteers have cleared unwanted growth from the Black Wood of Rannoch -- a remnant of the great pine forests which once covered much of the Highlands . 

  If you want to get involved , contact : 

  Freedom to roam 

  Those looking for straws in the wind on the right to roam issue have gained much from a statement made by Roger Carr , former chair of the Countryside Commission for Scotland . 

  In a speech distributed by the Ramblers Association , he said that legislation was needed on access rights for walkers . 

  Scotland's trespass laws are grey and de facto freedom to roam operates in appropriate countryside , provided good manners are demonstrated . 

  Mr Carr called on the Scottish environment minister , Sir Hector Monro , to establish a general right of access to Scotland's wild lands saying : " Quite apart from the value of such a right of access to all who wish to enjoy our beautiful landscapes and wildlife , I believe it would greatly assist landowners and land managers . 

  It would enable them to develop their policy and practice on the ground , so that management was seen to deliver real and positive benefits to the wider community . 

  Those enjoying right of access would understand the basis for such management . 

  They would appreciate how it is an integral part of good stewardship and environmentally responsible land ownership " . 

  A right of access should , however be subject to safeguards against damage and intrusion on privacy , he said . 

  Bothy to be renovated 

  One of the most lonely and best loved open bothies , the so-called Tarf " hotel " , in the Athol Forest , north of Glen Tilt , is to be managed by the Mountain Bothies Association ( MBA ) in co-operation with the Atholl Estates . 

  The bothy got its hotel nickname from an old two-star AA sign which was hung outside by hillgrangels . 

  This old hunting lodge began to deteriorate and when I was last there only one room was habitable . 

  If anyone is willing to help renovate it they should contact Jim Cosgrove or Jim Maison , of the MBA . 

  Please note , the bothy will be closed during the stag stalking season and the goodwill of the estate is essential for this welcome project . 

  The bothy is a marvellous base for several lonely hills and passes . 

  In memory 

  A permanent memorial is to be built to the two Glasgow University Mountaineering Club members , Brian Meers and Patrick Grey , who died on the Observatory Ridge of Ben Nevis in January . 

  The " Meers Grey Memorial Hut " will be constructed near Ballachulish , west of Glen Coe . 

  The GUM club are fund-raising to meet building costs between 10,000 to 12,000 . 

  If you want to help contact during office hours . 

  OUTDOOR NEWS 

  NEWS IN BRIEF 

  Natural pleasures 

  A new nature reserve on the Somerset Levels , near Glastonbury , which will eventually form part of one of the largest and most important wetlands in Europe , has been formally opened by Sir David Attenborough . 

  The 66 acre Greater Westhay Reserve is a pilot project for a scheme to transform 3,500 acres of exhausted peat workings into meadows , reed beds , open water and islands , to be called Avalon Marshes . 

  Never too old 

  The Scottish National Sports Centre at Glenmore Lodge in Aviemore is offering special activity breaks for the over 50s . 

  On the five day courses participants will have a chance to try out hillwalking , river kayaking , Canadian canoeing and rock climbing . 

  Cost for a course including full board and lodging is 175 . 

  For more information contact : 

  Memorial fund 

  A memorial fund to help young people enjoy the outdoors has been set up following the death in March of one of Britain's leading climbers , Andy Fanshawe . 

  The aim of the fund will be to award discretionary grants to young people who lack the resources to develop their interest in the outdoors . 

  Donations can be sent to : 

  Shetland Bods 

  A new kind of accommodation designed to appeal to budget travellers has been launched in the Shetland Islands . 

  Known as Bods , the buildings offer a space for cooking , eating and sleeping . 

  Facilities are basic -- only one has mains electricity -- although all have a toilet and cold water . 

  For more details . 

  Bike guides 

  Off-road routes for mountain bikes on the Isle of Weight have been outlined in a new series of guides , Byways and Bridleways by Mountain Bike . 

  They cost 85p each or 2.99 for the set of four . 

  Contact for details . 

  SCRAMBLE FOR EIGG HOTS UP 

  The Hebridean Island of Eigg is up for sale . 

  Its owner for the last 17 years , Keith Schellenberg , has been forced to put it on the market as part of a divorce settlement , agreed after more than ten years of legal wranglings . 

  Eigg , measuring just five miles by three , is treasured by walkers and naturalists alike . 

  It boasts a wide range of habitats supporting an impressive variety of plants , birds and butterflies . 

  There are three Sites of Special Scientific Interest on the island as well as 1,500 acre nature reserve managed by the Scottish Wildlife Trust . 

  It is offered for sale by estate agents Knight , Frank and Rutley who expect it to fetch between 1m and 2m . 

  So far , possible buyers have come forward from the UK , Europe and Canada . 

  Colin Strang Steel who is dealing with the sale told Outdoor Action " Some of the potential buyers want to live on the island , but I would not expect it would be full time . 

  They want it primarily as a holiday home , for recreation . 

  Some want to invest in the island and get some kind of tourism going . " 

  Conservationists and locals fear for the future of the island and a trust has been set up to raise money to buy it for the nation . 

  Simon Halliwell , a member of the Eigg Residents' Association , said " The majority of the islanders want the trust to take possession of the island . 

  We want a change from the feudal tenure we've had over the years . 

  The sale of the island is like a lottery and what happens here will depend on the whims of however becomes the owner . " 

  The Scottish Wildlife Trust ( SWT ) is also worried about the sale of Eigg . 

  Director David Hughes-Hallett said : " The last owner Keith Schallenberg was sympathetic to wildlife -- he did not carry out any shooting or fishing . 

  The new owner may not be so concerned . " 

  The SWT are especially worried about the future of Eigg's nature reserve . 

  David Hughes-Hallet explains " We do not actually own the reserve , we just manage it by agreement with the owner , so the sale is a very uncertain time for us . " 

  At least one set of potential buyers , from Holland , has been helicoptered on to Eigg to be shown around the island . 

  Resident Simon Halliwell says " This place is a gift for a person with a big ego and a big wallet and in the long term they will not be of any use to the island . " 

  Fancy a real thrill for free while raising money for a good cause ? 

  Well the Multiple Sclerosis Society has made it easy to take to the air whether it be by parachute , glider or plane . 

  Each activity is provided free to the participant in return for raising a minimum target sum in sponsorship . 

  The sponsorship targets range from 100 for a bungy jump to 240 for a tandem free fall skydive . 

  A brochure and further information are available by calling 

  READERS WIN GREAT GEAR PRIZES 

  Congratulations to Peter Stevens of Felinfoel in Dyfed . 

  You are the winner of our May competition and 630 worth of Jack Wolfskin gear will soon be on its way to you . 

  You win a Pocket Hotel Tent , an Ayer's Rock sleeping bag , a Stormrider jacket and an Altai 1 58 litre rucksack . 

  Looks like you shall have a good summer's backpacking ahead of you . 

  Five second prize winners each get a 30 litre Luftikus ACS rucksack worth 55 . 

  They are 

  Well done too to all ten of our third prize winners who get a Caribou daysack . 

  They are : 

  The answers to the anagrams were : 

  Congratulations are also due to the two winners of our mountain bike competition in the May special Bike supplement . 

  Diamond Back Ascents are on their way to and . 

  The answers to the questions were 1 . 

  The initials CTC stand for Cyclists' Touring Club . 

  2 . 

  The first Tour de France was held in 1903. 3 . 

  The principal governing body of cycling sport is the British Cycling Federation and 4 . 

  Cycling makes you fitter and gives you a better life expectancy . 

  Do not despair if you were not lucky enough to win this time . 

  Turn to page 46 for a chance to win a pair of great Line 7 boots . 

  FACELIFT FOR NATIONAL TRAIL 

  One of Britain's 12 national trails , the North Downs Way , is being given a major facelift over the next three years . 

  Established in 19878 the route stretches for 152 miles from Farnham in Surrey to Dover in Kent , with an alternative route passing through Canterbury . 

  Around 250,000 has been earmarked for the three year project by Kent County Council in conjunction with the Countryside Commission . 

  The money will be spent on clearing vegetation , resurfacing some areas and installing new stiles . 

  Preliminary work began last September following the appointment of two countryside officers who are employed full time on the project . 

  A new five mile circular walk , following part of the Way and running from Thurnham to Cobham Manor north of Maidstone , has already been established . 

  Plans to erect waymarkers and information boards along the route are also underway . 

  By the end of April next year it is hoped the project will have created between six and eight additional walks , in locations which have yet to be decided . 

  The countryside officers running the project are keen to hear from anyone who is interested in helping out . 

  Call for more details . 

  The booklet , North Downs Way -- A User's Guide ( price 1 ) and a free leaflet are available by contacting Steve Gilbert at Kent County Council's Planning Department . 

  Part of the 250,000 will be spent on new stiles on the North Downs Way 

  News from the National Parks 

  Erosion in the Beacons 

  Degradation of the waterfalls in the Vale of Neath area of the Brecon Beacons has reached such a critical level that urgent and radical action is required , according to a new national park study . 

  A number of solutions have been recommended in the report to protect this fragile landscape . 

  These include fencing , tree planting or the creation of conditions for natural regeneration , path repair , provision of new paths and improved signing and waymarking . 

  The report also suggest that there will need to be a greater commitment to wardening , monitoring and maintenance in future , if the situation is not to deteriorate again after the completion of repairs . 

  It is hoped that the worst of the damage will be repaired over the next two to three years . 

  Local Treasures 

  The Yorkshire Dales is establishing a Local Treasures Project to maintain locally important sites and features such as mileposts , boundary stones , monuments , stocks and watertroughs . 

  It is felt that they will add significantly to the cultural record of the park . 

  Many of these are small scale features which were commonplace in the past . 

  however over the years neglect , development and a general under-valuing of their importance have taken their toll . 

  Without positive action many of the examples which still survive will also disappear . 

  If this happens it will be a loss not just to the National Park , but more particularly to the local areas with which they are associated . 

  New Bridge , Old Design 

  The village of Egton Bridge in the North York Moors is to have its ugly 1930s " temporary " bridge replaced by a three arch structure based on the design of the original . 

  In the Esk Valley , the character of the village is enhanced by the river and the prominent road bridge . 

  The existing bridge was erected as a temporary measure to replace the original bridge which was destroyed by floods . 

  Last year a routine survey revealed that the bridge was in need of significant structural repair . 

  With reference to old photographs it was decided that the bridge could be replaced with one similar to the original pre-1930 structure . 

  The Park aims to contribute 35,000 to the total budget estimated at 400,000 . 

  Upper Derwent Valley 

  Plans to develop a path across Ladybower Dam proposed by Severn Trent Water have been welcomed in principle by the Peak District National Park . 

  There is already an operational route which is not open to the public . 

  To make it suitable for public use improvements will need to be made including resurfacing the stone route -- this will also make it suitable for wheelchairs -- and installing metal railings by the path . 

  News supplied by the Council for National Parks 

  UK WOODLANDS AT RISK 

  In the wake of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro , a damning report from English Nature shows that ancient woodlands have declined by nearly 50 % in the past 50 years -- that is faster than the felling of the rainforests in Brazil . 

  Based on a ten year study the report shows remaining areas of woodland and those lost since the end of the First World War . 

  The report states that about 45 % of ancient woodlands have been destroyed or seriously damaged , compared with only 10 % of the Amazon forests . 

  English Nature's Derek Langslow defines ancient woodlands as those which have been in existence since the 16th century or earlier . 

  The bulk of the destruction occurred during the 1950s and 1960s when the trees were felled to provide land for agriculture or for re-planting with conifers . 

  The destruction slowed down because of surpluses in farmland and an increased realisation of the woodland's conservation value . 

  However he argued that ancient woodlands were still under threat from new planting and new road developments -- for example the proposed destruction of Oxleas Wood in south east London , to make way for a Thames crossing . 

  RSPB CALL TO STOP PERSECUTION OF BIRDS 

  Many of the UK's rarest birds of prey are under continuing threat of persecution , claim the RSPB as they launch a campaign to raise 400,000 to help eradicate the problem . 

  This follows close on the heels of a report published by the RSPB last year , Death by Design , which outlined just how serious the problem had become . 

  For example there were 367 recorded deaths of buzzards over a ten year period , although according to the RSPB the real figure is likely to be ten times that number . 

  Other birds particularly under threat include the red kite , white-tailed eagle , golden eagle and hen harrier . 

  There have already been two incidents in a wood in Wales this year , where two red kites and five ravens were found poisoned , and one buzzard and two ravens were shot . 

  RSPB spokesperson Mike Everett said some of the worst offenders were a minority of gamekeepers who shoot birds of prey because they believe they threaten their game birds " despite research which shows this is not the case . " 

  Money raised will be used to increase investigations of persecution offences and boost the RSPB's education programme . 

  This involves giving talks to farmers and gamekeepers about how they can carry out their work in a bird-friendly way . 

  In the longer term the RSPB will continue its campaign for stiffer penalties for those who illegally persecute birds of prey and for greater restrictions on the availability of poisons . 

  FAVOURITE WALKING AREAS 

  Writers' CHOICE 

  Decisions , decisions , decisions . 

  With so many fantastic walking areas in Britain it's sometimes hard to decide which one to explore on that well-earned summer break . 

  Well help is at hand . 

  Six of our regular writers reveal their favourite areas and that special something that continues to lure them back year after year 

  CORNWALL 

  Catherine Moore is an award winning outdoor journalist , whose first loves are walking and conservation 

  Anyone with a love of the sea will be impressed by Cornwall's Penwith peninsula -- the tip of the country . 

  Along the north coast you shall see the most striking cliff scenery , with crashing blue seas vividly bringing the picture to life . 

  Each turn along the coast path reveals a beautiful sandy cove , or jagged rocks giving lie to the notion that this is just a pretty landscape . 

  I also like the area because of its prehistoric relics , abundance of wildflowers and , on a more mundane level , because in my experience it seems to get more than its fair share of decent weather . 

  St Ives makes a great base , especially if you're relying on public transport to get around . 

  The bus service is erratic out of season but can make a wide variety of walks accessible in summer . 

  There are plenty of self catering flats or bed and breakfasts in town , as well as campsites nearby . 

  The coast path is the one to head for -- you can spend a week walking different sections from a single base and it's a good backpacking route . 

  I reckon the sections running south of St Ives are the best . 

  The walk from St Ives to Zennor , and up-and-down run of around six miles , left a strong impression on me . 

  The weather was perfect and the blue of the sea below looked like the Mediterranean , going to turquoise then white , as it hit the dramatic , spiky rocks . 

  Another spectacular section of the coast path runs from above Morvah -- where there are great views to the Trevowhan and Trevean cliffs to the east -- along to the Botallack . 

  You can return to Morvah across country , stopping off to see Chun Quoit , the remains of a Neolithic tomb . 

  You will not have the coast path from Sennen harbour to Land's End to yourself but it's worth doing for the marvellous views of the impressive rock formations on the way . 

  An inland walk I've enjoyed is around a five mile route starting from Bosullow Common , south of Morvah , an area rich in prehistoric remains . 

  The day was suitably misty , just right for a trip to the " healing " stones of Men an Tol . 

  The Men is an over-sized bronze age stone polo mint with standing stones either side . 

  From here I walked on to Men Scryfa , an iron age monument and on to the Nine Maidens prehistoric stone circle . 

  And after a long day's walking , what better way to end it than with a glass of cider in one of St Ives' treasures -- The Three Ferrets . 

  NORTH YORKSHIRE 

  Left : to Snowdon summit with Lliwedd on the left . 

  Below : over the Wainstones to Garrats Gap on the Cleveland Way and the Lyke Wake Walk . 

  Jacqui Bowen is a journalist from South Wales who likes to spend as much time as possible out on the hill 

  North Yorkshire offers excellent possibilities for challenging walking but it's also good to know that there's plenty to do close at hand when the weather turns moorland expeditions into exercises in masochism . 

  At times like that -- and it must be admitted they are quite frequent in this part of the world -- the coastal villages never fail to enchant me . 

  There's something about the way they're built and their atmosphere that prevents places like Staithes and Whitby slipping overboard from picturesque to grotesque . 

  A day by the seaside has a different meaning on the breezy east coast . 

  There is some superb coastal walking -- the Cleveland Way joins the coast at Saltburn and runs down to Filey -- which takes in some of the most dramatic cliffs in Britain . 

  And if anyone thinks this is a soft option -- try a cliff-top route with a storm blowing . 

  The Cod and Lobster Inn at Staithes has been washed away and rebuilt three times -- best get in there quickly before the next storm strikes ... always a good excuse . 

  The Cleveland Way and the Lyke Wake Walk are , of course , the best known long distance routes and they coincide for about 12 miles . 

  There are over 1,000 miles of public footpaths and bridleways within the national park boundaries and with vast numbers of walkers being sucked into the Lake District and Peak District , finding a quiet spot is rarely difficult . 

  And that's what really makes the area so special and keeps me coming back . 

  SNOWDONIA 

  Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years' experience of walking , camping and backpacking at home and abroad 

  It came as a shock to realise that nearly 20 years had passed since an enthusiastic young couple in Capel Curig told me they were going to " do " Snowdonia that afternoon . 

  I've visited at least two or three times each year since then and I still hesitate to claim to know the area really well . 

  If you visit a place frequently you undergo a strange transition in feelings towards it . 

  The first , exploratory visits are all about the thrill of the new . 

  Those thrills prompt you to come back for more but they're often reinforced by a swirling hotch-potch of memories . 

  These memories can pop up at any time and transform even the most mundane occasion into something special . 

  The last time I camped at the Forestry Commission site at Beddgelert I recalled -- for no good reason , but with an involuntary laugh -- a visit with my rotund pal Brian . 

  Wearing a woollen pixie hat above his bright red beard , he loudly and uninterruptedly belched and farted his way up and down Moel Hebog with a cheery smile and complete disregard for the appalled looks which followed his thundering progress . 

  Each time I have a pint in the pub at Rhydd Ddu I recall a snowy Easter night spent waiting for mates who had set off earlier to tackle the Snowdon Horseshoe . 

  When they had not returned by 9.30pm I was starting to worry . 

  Thankfully they piled in shortly after with assorted and strangely contradictory tales of storms , abseils and heroism in the face of overwhelming odds -- the only consistency being a ferocious thirst . 

  When in Betws y Coed , an afternoon of muscle-wrenching mountain biking comes to mind . 

  The afternoon in question was spent in a painful attempt ( wholly unsuccessful ) to keep up with a young woman who later turned out to be a champion rider with a European reputation . 

  I've had my picture taken alongside most of Snowdonia's summit cairns and I no longer feel prodded by guide books or pressured by time to tick off one top after another . 

  These days I march to a different tune . 

  The national park covers an astonishing 840 square miles -- I've tended to concentrate on northern Snowdonia and even there have barely scraped the surface . 

  I wonder how much I could " do " over the next 20 years ? 

  DORSET 

  Henry Druce is features editor of Outdoor Action -- when he's not out hillwalking , mountain biking , skiing or falling off his windsurfer 

  Durdle Door -- a stunning natural arch at St Oswald's Bay near Lulworth . 

  I am a sucker for coastal walking and am naturally attracted to Dorset as it offers some of the best in the country . 

  The Dorset coast path runs along a spectacular rugged cliffline from Poole Harbour to Lyme Regis , taking you to great beaches through some extraordinary landscapes . 

  The most famous of Dorset's natural oddities is the rock arch at Durdle Door -- it looks like a jagged shark fin . 

  Other curious features can be seen at Lulworth Cove , home of the famous Strait Hole -- a collapsed sea cave with striking rock formations and arches . 

  Then between Worth Matravers and Poole are Old Harry Rocks -- a collection of large rocks jutting out of the sea . 

  Further west lies Chesil Bank -- a spectacular 18 mile pebble beach which joins the Isle of Portland to the mainland . 

  I've never walked the whole 72-mile coast path in one go as I tend to head to Dorset at weekends and just explore different areas on day walks . 

  However , accommodation is readily available on the route with an ample choice of bed and breakfasts , youth hostels and campsites . 

  There are also many charming pubs around . 

  A favourite of mine is the Square and Compass in Worth Matravers where I've supped many a fine pint . 

  Although for me Dorset's main attraction is its coastline , I've also enjoyed exploring many of the inland areas , in particular Studland Heath . 

  This 400 acre nature reserve near Swanage is home to a tremendous variety of flora and fauna . 

  It's one of the few places in Britain where you can catch sight of the endangered sand lizard or smooth snake . 

  The giant Agglestone Rock is also to be found here , looking somewhat out of place on the rolling heathland . 

  According to legend it was thrown by the Devil from the Isle of Wight . 

  The Purbeck Hills in south Dorset give a good contrast to the coastal scenery . 

  I've explored the hills both on foot and on mountain bike , on the many tracks and bridleways which criss-cross the area . 

  Be warned though , the rolling hills and rugged terrain will test your mountain biking stamina to the extreme . 

  I've also been mountain biking around Dorchester which is somewhat gentler going though equally spectacular . 

  There's a great wooded area fairly close to the town -- including the wonderfully named Tolpuddle Hollow and Puddletown Heath . 

  The many tracks through the woods make it easy to get lost -- but that's never bothered me . 

  Another reason I like Dorset so much is for the windsurfing . 

  I've often taken a board and gone sailing in Poole Harbour , the second largest natural harbour in the world . 

  It's a great place for beginners to learn as the harbour has shallow water -- only 40ft at its deepest point -- with constant winds and protection from being swept out to sea . 

  The tremendous variety of activities in Dorset ensure that I will continue to visit time after time . 

  See you there ! 

  SCOTLAND 

  Rennie McOwan writes Outdoor Action's Scottish news . 

  He's been a hillwalker for 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors 

  The terrain of the 22 mile trek in Wester Ross is some of the wildest in Britain . 

  I have walked it in a day , but it can take as long as a week to complete . 

  The route takes you several miles from any habitation , unbridged burns and rivers have to be crossed during its length and you will find yourself surrounded by some of the most delectable mountains . 

  No one should undertake this hill crossing unless they are confident of covering long distances , carrying food , clothing and other gear for several days . 

  Knowing how to navigate is essential . 

  There are two open bothies on the route but contrary to what is written in some places , the farm at lonely Carnmore on the Letterewe estate is not inhabited except for part of the year . 

  Access should not be a problem provided the walker sticks to the glen paths , but a prior check with the estates is courteous and this journey should be avoided during the peak of the deer stalking season . 

  There is no ban on camping in lonely corners of the Letterewe estate . 

  However campers should only stay for a night or two , be unobtrusive and sensitive to wildlife , and leave no litter . 

  However the owner of the estate prefers people to use the bothy at Carnmore . 

  This bothy also doubles as a stable for estate garrons ( hill ponies ) . 

  The Letterewe estate is run as a wilderness area and not as a commercial estate -- this is an immense boon as far as preserving the beauty of the area is concerned . 

  Start from the parking area close to Corrie Hallie on the A832 south-east of Loch Broom , then take a broad track southwards . 

  Two miles into the hills , the track to Shenavall bothy goes off to the right . 

  Make that a base for explorations into the fine mountains all around . 

  The Shenavall river , the Abhainn Strath na Sealga , has to be crossed . 

  However because this is a true wilderness area and there is no bridge over the river , the water levels may be too high , giving you no option but to abort the trip . 

  Once you've crossed the river , cross rough ground to a second river , Larachantivore , where there is ( or was on my last visit , at any rate ) an ancient and rickety bridge . 

  Be prepared to wade here , taking care that you do not go out of your depth . 

  After this second river a better track leads westwards through Gleann na Muice Beag . 

  It crosses wild hill ground giving fine views before descending to the Carnmore bothy and its old farmhouse . 

  Here great mountains lie all around . 

  Cross the causeway between Loch Dubh and long Fionn Loch , before estate tracks lead you westwards to Kernsary and eventually onto the A832 and Poolewe village . 

  The phrase wilderness is often overused and misplaced . 

  The walk outlined here comes close to being a true wilderness area , being lonely , beautiful and sometimes precarious . 

  The rewards gained from visiting such an area can be both magnificent and enduring . 

  Carnmore on the Letterewe estate in Wester Ross . 

  A wonderful and wild landscape to walk through 

  PEMBROKESHIRE 

  Heather Barrett is a journalist who has trekked extensively around the world . 

  She is currently co-writing a book on her recent Amazon expedition 

  Pembrokeshire heads my list of favourite UK walking areas . 

  It combines a wide variety of wonderful walks with an abundance of wildlife and natural history . 

  There is always something new to see or discover , even on a short walk . 

  The scenery is breathtaking , the rugged coast path meanders among tall cliffs , high above the fine beaches and pale turquoise sea . 

  Solitude is easy to find and there is a general air of timelessness and unblemished natural beauty wherever you go . 

  Ancient castles , burial chambers , ruins and churches are scattered over the area , highlighting the rich cultural heritage and providing a contrast to the golden sands , estuaries and wooded valleys . 

  No walker who visits Pembrokeshire can fail to be tempted by part of the 180 mile coastal path . 

  It's easy to walk along and the views are unparalleled . 

  Even on a short section you can see many of the different birds which colonise nearby Ramsey , Skikholm and Skomer islands , and perhaps some of the gannets that breed further out on Grassholm . 

  If you look out to sea it's fairly easy to spot seals basking in the water or if you're lucky , you might catch sight of a school of porpoise , a dolphin , or even a turtle . 

  One of my favourite stretches is the majestic peninsula around St Davids , Wales' most famous headland . 

  It's an easy walk which can be extended as far as you wish without having to retrace your steps . 

  In summer heather and bracken carpet the clifftops and riots of butterflies crowd the bushes and flowers . 

  If you've got a few days to spare , head inland to the 400 million year old Presley Hills . 

  There are good walks in these wild and untarnished mountains and the views from the tops are lovely . 

  I also like the sheltered Nevern and Gwaun valleys and the banks of the Daugleddau Estuary . 

  Here pockets of ancient semi-natural woodland , unafraid wildlife and a sense of history and heritage combine to offer a peaceful retreat from the coast . 

  It's easy to see why many people say of the place " Once seen never forgotten " . 

  WALKING IN THE LAKES 

  Lakeland Circuit 

  We asked guidebook writer Paul Buttle to devise a circular route in the Lakes for Outdoor Action readers . 

  In 12 days or sections of two days or more , always with high and low alternatives , we think it's the best Lakeland route ever . 

  Probably . 

  Parts 2 and 3 in August and September 

  My first experience of the Lake District was on a circular walking tour made over 25 years ago with two friends . 

  We did little planning other than booking our accommodation in a chain of well positioned youth hostels , but the holiday was memorable . 

  Each day we discovered something new and were constantly amazed by the intricate beauty of the area . 

  The aim of the circular walk I've devised is to capture as fully as possible the incredible magic of the Lakes . 

  The circuit aims to give walkers the best possible experience of the area in a single route . 

  It passes among Lakeland's most exciting summits and beautiful dales without crossing over itself or backtracking , and it avoids commercialised areas . 

  When I came to planning the circuit I realised there would actually have to be two routes -- a high level one , leading over the crest of the fells , and a low level alternative for unfavourable weather . 

  A lower level route is also a good option for days when you're not feeling up to making it across the tops . 

  This alternative low level route is a valid circuit in itself and not just a poor substitute . 

  In one respect it is superior , as by staying lower down you will be constantly amazed by the ever changing scenery -- higher up the views give you a good idea of the terrain you shall be walking through the next day . 

  The circuit's main route works out to be over 140 miles long and involves over 38,000 feet of climbing . 

  It is meant to be a 12 day walk but because of its convoluted shape the circuit can easily be shortened , for instance two of the days are more or less optional . 

  The walk can be done all in one go or in sections -- for many it might be easier to tackle two days at a time at the weekends . 

  Accommodation is available at the end of each day's walk , though sometimes this is very limited , ranging from a hotel to a simple youth hostel . 

  Taking a tent obviously gives a lot more flexibility , freeing you from the near necessity of booking accommodation in advance . 

  On 11 of the 12 night stopovers you can obtain a meal locally , usually bar food , so it is possible to consider camping without using any cooking equipment -- this would considerably reduce the weight of your backpack . 

  I rather like the flexible concept of this circuit . 

  It allows you to alternate between a high and low route and it's easy to extend the walk or take short cuts . 

  In truth I have a slight horror of a route becoming " The ( Something ) Way " , as if no other way was possible . 

  This circuit is meant to be adapted to your specific needs , so rather than call it " The Lakeland Way " or anything as horrendous as that , I would rather call it something antiquated like : " Notes Towards a Considered Circular Pedestrian Peregrination Amongst some of the Major Fells and Dales of the County of Cumbria " , but it is hardly a working title . 

  I am willing therefore to call it " A Lakeland Circuit " , so long as it remains merely " a " circuit and does not become " the " circuit . 

  Kentmere village typifies the incomparable beauty of the Lake District 

  DAY 1 

  STAVELEY TO HAWESWATER 

  The circuit begins at Staveley . 

  It's an uninspiring village but it has a railway station , so it's a convenient place to begin . 

  But more importantly it is a good starting place for exploring the lesser known eastern valleys which are peaceful , quiet and cut off from the rest of the Lake District . 

  Walk Directions 

  From Staveley walk northwards to Kentmere ( 4.5 miles ) but avoid walking along the road . 

  To the west of the river a chain of trackways and paths provide a more appealing route . 

  As you near the village of Kentmere the beauty of the Lake District becomes so clear . 

  The village does not have a pub or even a shop . 

  However , a couple of houses serve afternoon teas in the Green Quarter . 

  From the Green Quarter strike north another half mile along a road and then go eastwards along a bridleway to Sadgill in the slender valley of Longsleddale ( 2 miles ) . 

  The surfaced road ends at Sadgill from where it continues as a rough enclosed trackway , climbing up to the head of the valley . 

  At the head of the valley bear north-east onto a path across a shallow watershed into Mosedale ( 2 miles ) . 

  The next three miles of pathway northwards from Mosedale to Swindale are the least dramatic of the circuit . 

  However , at Swindale you are rewarded with an amphitheatre of classic Lakeland features such as crags , waterfalls , glacial hummocks and a traditional farm . 

  From Swindale Head Farm follow the " Old Corpse Road " , actually a footpath , over the Haweswater . 

  Escape Routes 

  Gatescarth Pass , between the head of Longsleddale and Haweswater . 

  Shortens the route by some two miles though it involves going slightly higher than the main route . 

  Low Level Route 

  There is not one , although on the first day the main route is essentially at low level . 

  DAY 2 

  HAWESWATER TO PATTERDALE 

  Between Haweswater and the rest of the Lake District lies the longest range of hills in the Lake District above 2,000ft . 

  The main route is along the top of part of this range which includes the summit of High Street . 

  From here , provided the weather is fine , you will gain an impressive view of Lakeland's other summits . 

  Walk Directions 

  From the head of Haweswater ascend high Street , named after the Roman road that once ran along the ridge between Blea Water and Riggindale , on a well defined path . 

  From the summit strike northwards for two and a half miles along an obvious path . 

  The range is very rounded on the top and sections of it are fairly flat , so this part of the route should be an easy saunter . 

  After passing over the top of Red Crag -- an ill-defined top marked with a small cairn of stones to the left of the fence -- bear to the left through the remains of a wooden gate towards a much lower peak intriguingly called Pikeawassa . 

  The path traverses round this peak and leads down to the Old Church of Martindale ( 2.5 miles ) . 

  Martindale is another valley which seems to have altered little for a century or more . 

  It is wonderfully tranquil and pastoral . 

  From the old church continue along a narrow country lane to the hamlet of Sandwick on the shoreline of Ullswater . 

  From there follow a very popular lakeshore path that follows the eastern shoreline of the lake to Patterdale ( 5 miles ) . 

  Low Level Route 

  There is no real low level alternative because the High Street range presents such a physical barrier . 

  But if weather conditions are really severe , or bad enough to put you off , there is a way of literally getting around this " obstacle " . 

  From Haweswater walk to Bampton village and then cross from there over Divock Moor to Pooley Bridge ( 9 miles ) . 

  From here catch either the CMS ( Cumberland Motor Services ) 108 bus to Patterdale or the Ullswater motor launch to Glenridding -- this runs seasonally from Easter to October . 

  Hotel : ( For a wider choice head a mile north to Glenridding ) . 

  Shops : This is a well-stocked village store . 

  Pubs and eating places : Bar meals are available here . 

  Public transport : bus service from Patterdale Hotel to Penrith Railway Station via Pooley Bridge ( number 103 ) . 

  In the summer the route also extends to Windermere station . 

  A SINGLE DAY ALTERNATIVE TO DAYS 1 &amp;amp; 2 

  If you wish to bypass Haweswater you can do so easily enough by continuing from Kentmere village to the head of the valley . 

  This leads to Nan Bield Pass , from here walk up to the top of High Street . 

  At the top you can continue along the route described for Day 2 -- a long day's walk -- or for a shorter route descend to Patterdale via Angle Tarn . 

  DAY 3 

  PATTERDALE TO DERWENTWATER 

  The main route crosses over the summit of Helvellyn , the third highest and one of the most popular peaks in the Lake District . 

  The ascent is via Striding Edge the most dramatic ridge in the area . 

  Public transport : bus service from Penrith railway station to Patterdale ( number 108 ) . 

  In summer the service connects with Windermere Station . 

  Walk Directions 

  From Patterdale take the minor road leading to the Patterdale Pack Kennels ( 1 mile ) . 

  Just before reaching the kennels join the start of a long diagonal path leading to the crest of Striding Edge . 

  Follow the crest of the ridge to the summit of Helvellyn ( 3 miles ) . 

  From the summit head south along the broad path which follows the summit ridge . 

  This soon branches in two . 

  Follow the right hand branch to Wythburn . 

  From here take the path which starts from Wythburn Church car park running parallel to the A591 and linking with a minor road running along the west side of Thirlmere Reservoir ( 3 miles ) . 

  Follow this road ( for 0.75 of a mile ) to the start of an old packhorse route leading to Harrop Tarn . 

  From Harrop Tarn the packhorse route leads on to Blea Tarn ( 1.5 miles ) and then down to the small hamlet of Watendlath ( 2 miles ) , situated at the end of a narrow valley next to a small tarn . 

  From the hamlet follow the road to Derwentwater ( 2.5 miles ) , or use the path on the west side of Watendlath Beck to High Lodore Farm ( 2 miles ) . 

  Escape Routes 

  None , but it is possible to get a bus at Wythburn church . 

  CMS's 555 service takes you to Keswick . 

  Then catch the 79 Seatoller service from Keswick to take you to the southern end of Derwentwater . 

  Low Level Route 

  From Patterdale walk to Grisedale Tarn at the head of the Grisedale valley , along a broad trackway which becomes a bridleway ( 5 miles ) . 

  Apart from Ennerdale , Grisedale is the largest roadless valley in the Lakes . 

  it is striking and overlooked by impressive crags . 

  From Grisedale Tarn pass through the gap between Seat Sandal and Dollywagon Pike and descend to Dunmail Raise , the pass between Grasmere and Thirlmere . 

  From the very top of the pass take the path to Thirlmere ( 0.75 mile ) . 

  This parallels the main A591 road and links to a forestry track which you follow until you join a minor road running along the western side of the reservoir . 

  From here you can continue along the main route as described above . 

  Pubs and eating places : both hotels have public bars . 

  Grisedale -- the largest roadless valley in the Lake District 

  DAY 4 

  DERWENTWATER TO BUTTERMERE 

  There is a difficult choice to make between today's main high level route and the lower alternative . 

  The lower level route passes through Newlands , a wonderful valley surrounded by shapely fells , while the high level choice is an excellent undulating ridge walk . 

  Compared to the previous day this is a short walk whether you choose the high or low route . 

  If you wanted to shorten the circuit you could press on to Black Sail Hut . 

  See Day 5 ( in the next issue ) . 

  Walk Directions 

  Walk round the lake to the foot of the Cat Bells ridge ( 3.5 miles ) . 

  Alternatively you can get to the same point by ferry . 

  Catch the one going clockwise from either the Ashness or the Lodore boat landings , to get to the Hawse End landings at the foot of the Cat Bells ridge . 

  The service runs from Easter to November and on winter weekends . 

  From Hawes End follow the path on to the Cat Bells ridge onto Cat Bells ( 1 mile ) and then onto Maiden Moor ( 1 mile ) and High Spy ( 1.5 mile ) . 

  From High Spy there is a short descent to Dale Head Tarn ( 0.75 mile south ) followed by a half mile ascent to the top of Dale Head . 

  From Dale Head walk across the shoulder of Hindscarth and on to Robinson ( 2 miles , in a north-westerly direction ) . 

  From Robinson descent to Buttermere via High Snockrigg . ( 1.75 miles westwards ) . 

  Escape Routes 

  From Dale Head Tarn it is possible to cut across the top of High Scawdel to Honister Pass and then descend by road to Buttermere , partly across open fell and partly on footpath ( 1 mile ) . 

  Also between Hindscarth and Ronsingon , it is possible to descend from any point along this ridge to the Buttermere valley . 

  Low Level Route 

  From the Hawes End boat landings follow the nearby road to Skelgill Farm ( half mile ) and from there cut across the fields along a path to Littletown ( 1 mile ) . 

  From here continue along the road , again around the head of the valley , to a large purple house called Rigg Beck ( 0.75 mile ) . 

  From here follow the nearby stream uphill to a narrow pass between Ard Crags and Scar Crags ( 1.75 miles ) . 

  As you go over the pass the path descends the side of Sail Beck to Buttermere ( 2.75 miles ) . 

  Shops : none but the campsite farm has a few limited supplies . 

  Pubs and eating places : both the hotels in the village have public bars and serve meals . 

  WALKING IN IRELAND 

  Pilgrims' Progress 

  On " Reek Sunday " thousands of pilgrims climb Croagh Patrick in Co Mayo . 

  Rennie McOwan walked with them 

  A psalmist in Biblical times wrote of lifting one's eyes to the hills but on the day we visited Croagh Patrick on the western seaboard of Co Mayo , Ireland thousands were doing more than just look . 

  I have never been on a mountain with so many other people before . 

  We reckoned there were at least 12,000 and the total over the weekend topped the 20,000 mark . 

  At 2,510ft Croagh Patrick is a big , stony mound which overlooks the many islands of Westport Bay and gives splendid views to many inland hills and into Connemara . 

  In pre-Christian times it was a sacred hill . 

  Festivities and worship-rites were held on the top which declined when the new faith arrived . 

  It was here that St Patrick , patron saint of Ireland , fasted and meditated and , according to legend , banished all the snakes from Ireland . 

  It's said to be a symbolic tale with the casting out of the snakes related to the ousting of the old beliefs . 

  Over the centuries a tradition arose of pilgrims going to Croagh Patrick , spending the night on top and hearing Mass at dawn . 

  Later the Mass switched to daytime as numbers grew . 

  The pilgrimage grew more popular until Reek Sunday , as local people call it , evolved into a national event . 

  Now people come from all over Ireland who combine climbing the peak , saying prayers en route and attending Mass on top , with ceilidhs and dances . 

  We had spent some days in the hills of Mayo before deciding to go to Croagh Patrick . 

  It was thought locally that attendance might be down because of a Gaelic football regional cup tie taking place at the same time , but many people managed to do both . 

  It was startling to see thousands of people of all ages toiling up and down the hill , like two gigantic snakes ( if that is not somewhat inappropriate ) , squelching over lower , peaty sections and gingerly picking their way up large and often precarious scree . 

  Growing numbers of tourists joined in this ant-like procession . 

  We saw French , Americans , Spaniards , Italians , Catalans , Dutch and some serious looking Swedes whose leader had a walkie-talkie . 

  Some had national flags flying from their rucksacks so we hung out a tiny Scottish Saltire . 

  It was an extraordinary occasion , lively , moving , startling in its diversity and with much good humour . 

  There were inevitable casualties on such steep and slippery ground . 

  Every now and again rescue teams of young people would pick their way downhill with a bandaged pilgrim on a stretcher . 

  The injuries were mainly facial cuts from tripping on the stones . 

  Some of the pilgrims walked barefoot , a growing trend , at which we gasped . 

  We sometimes saw elderly people stopping to catch their breath and calling to those descending " Is it far ? " 

  There was a great deal of encouragement and a helping hand for those finding it tough , mixed in with an occasional piece of mild blasphemy as yet another pilgrim went sprawling on the wet peat . 

  There are problems with the condition of the path and , alas , litter . 

  However , we were told that path repair work is planned and that groups of young people do clean-ups . 

  In recent times the Irish Government faced a dilemma over the future of Croagh Patrick . 

  Gold was found there and a full scale conservation row broke out as mining exploration started . 

  The Government stopped it and pledged to save the mountain . 

  This was an enlightened decision , but it can not have been easy given the high level of unemployment in the rural west , and the need to find more material resources . 

  It was probably the right decision for tourism , but more importantly there is such a thing as the life of the soul . 

  Croagh Patrick can enrich the hillwalker's spirit . 

  And all those toiling thousands had a part to play in the decision to protect the hill . 

  I like solitude on the mountains and avoid crowds where I can , but I can truthfully say that Reek Sunday was a unique experience . 

  I can still hear the laughter on the slopes and feel the wind on the summit as a quiet congregation knelt in the mist and rain . 

  Top : the path up Croagh Patrick is lined with pilgrims . 

  Left : Croagh Patrick is a beautiful mountain , capable of lifting walkers' spirits 

  BONINGTON INTERVIEW 

  Chris Bonington 

  The high life 

  Chris Bonington's passion for climbing and adventure has taken him on expeditions all over the world . 

  Henry Druce meets the man behind the image 

  Chris Bonington is Britain's best known climber and adventurer . 

  His climbing achievements are many , but it is his attempts on Everest which have lodged him firmly in the public consciousness . 

  He finally reached this elusive peak in 1985 , and since then he has captured the public's imagination on other expeditions . 

  The most obvious example was the attempt to find a yeti on an expedition Bonington led to climb Menlungtse in the Himalaya . 

  One of his most recent expeditions was climbing in an unexplored area of Greenland , having sailed there in a yacht . 

  During over 30 years of adventures Bonington has faced great danger -- he admits he is lucky to be alive -- and lost many friends . 

  But when you speak to him it quickly becomes clear that his passion for climbing and adventure remains as strong as ever . 

  I met him at his son's flat in north London -- a somewhat incongruous setting for a man who's spent so much of his time in some of the wildest places in the world . 

  And in the flesh he lives up to his image -- at 58 he's lean and fit , and with his tanned face and hallmark beard , he looks every bit the outdoor adventurer . 

  What was your most successful expedition ? 

  On one level I suppose climbing the south-west face of Everest was the biggest and most complete expedition , but in spite of our being successful , one member of the team died on the second summit attempt . 

  As far as pure simple enjoyment goes , I'd say it was an expedition to a mountain called Shivling which Jim Fotheringham and I climbed in 1983 . 

  It was a new route up a beautiful unclimbed peak , the west summit of Shivling . 

  We climbed pure alpine style , which is very fast and light , and got up and down in one piece . 

  In some ways it was one of the most satisfying climbs I've done . 

  Above : Chris Bonington -- Britain's best known climber and adventurer in action 

  What's the closest you've come to death ? 

  There have been so many narrow escapes that it's very difficult to say which one was the closest . 

  Usually they're silly things were you have not quite clipped in correctly to the rope and suddenly , zap , you realise you've missed death by only a hair's breadth . 

  I think any serious climber has got to admit that he's lucky to be alive , not that he's skilful to be alive . 

  Considering the risks , what continues to motivate you to climb ? 

  I just love it . 

  I love the sensation of climbing , I love being in the hills . 

  I get a real kick out of it and thoroughly enjoy doing it . 

  Have you ever tried to reach a summit when in retrospect you've realised that the conditions were too dangerous ? 

  The motivation to go on or turn back depends on an awful lot of factors . 

  There are times when I've pushed on when all the signals were saying turn back . 

  There are other times when I've turned back and felt " gosh no , this is wrong " and afterwards thought why did I turn back , maybe I should have carried on . 

  I think the key thing is to listen to that instinct as it's most probably the thing that has the highest chance of being right . 

  If you ignore your instinct , that's when you get into trouble . 

  Where does this instinct come from ? 

  I think it is going into your subconscious and picking up a whole series of signals . 

  It's picking up signals of what your mental and physical state is and referring back to a lot of experience -- all of these things make a kind of gut instinct . 

  Primarily though it's how you are in yourself at the time which determines whether you are going to get up the mountain and get back down . 

  What did it feel like when you finally made it to the summit of Everest ? 

  At the time it was a traumatic experience . 

  While climbing the last little bit I could not help thinking of all the mates who had been killed . 

  In fact I cried when I got to the top , but I think that that was just a release of emotion . 

  Subsequently when I got back down and realised we'd done it , and everyone had got off the mountain and no-one had been injured , I had an immense feeling of satisfaction , just of having stood there . 

  And a great feeling of release . 

  It left me free to do all kinds of other things that I wanted to do . 

  I's had quite a hang up about getting to the top of it . 

  Is climbing primarily a mental or physical challenge ? 

  It's a combination of the two . 

  Climbing , even rock climbing , is a matter of having the physical ability to scale a section of rock , but you've also got to have it in your mind to work out how you're going to do it , and have the motivation to push yourself . 

  You once organised an expedition to find the yeti . 

  Did you ever feel you had a chance of finding it ? 

  I was pretty open about that -- it certainly enabled us to climb Menlungtse in the Himalaya . 

  Our prime aim was to climb the mountain but the BBC camera team and the Mail on Sunday journalist were primarily interested in hunting the yeti . 

  If they wanted to do that while we climbed our mountain , that was fine by me . 

  Did they ever come close ? 

  God alone knows . 

  I think the yeti is wonderfully unproven in either direction . 

  I mean we did see some strange tracks and we did find this sheep which had been completely gutted , but apparently that could have been done by a snow leopard . 

  And in fact at the end of the expedition ski poles which had been left at the bottom of the climb had vanished . 

  It seems unlikely that a Tibetan would have got up there to take them , but then it could be argued that it's equally unlikely that a yeti was the culprit . 

  There were ambiguous unanswered questions . 

  What do you think about the environmental damage caused by the huge number of trekkers and climbers who visit Nepal ? 

  It's a serious problem which has to be looked at on two levels . 

  The first level is something that the climbers can do something about , and that is removing their rubbish . 

  There are huge amounts of rubbish scattered everywhere and that is appalling . 

  One of the main problems , particularly at the Everest base camp , is this business of allowing eight expeditions to climb Everest at the same time . 

  This makes it very easy for climbers not to take responsibility for the rubbish they create . 

  Secondly , with the weight of tourist traffic going into Nepal , I think the government has got to accept a share of the responsibility . 

  There should be some kind of rubbish disposal facility and you need proper campsites for the trekkers , with camp wardens . 

  I also think there is probably a strong argument for controlling the numbers that go into some of these areas , like they do in American national parks . 

  The key problem though is not so much the rubbish , which is cosmetic , but deforestation . 

  The number of trekkers going into the area is only partially to blame . 

  The main reason is population growth which is causing the people to clear more woodland so they can cultivate the land . 

  They desperately need to start controlling their population and find alternative forms of fuel . 

  In the long term these things need to be addressed if the mountain areas are not going to receive very very serious damage . 

  You recently went on an expedition sailing to Greenland to climb a previously unexplored mountain . 

  How did it go ? 

  It was a fascinating experience but from the climbing point of view the ratios were not terribly good . 

  It was something like six weeks at sea and 14 days on land . 

  And most of that 14 days was spent travelling at the foot of the mountains . 

  So we actually ended up with two days' climbing . 

  But having said that , it was wonderful and I would not have missed that trip for anything . 

  Was it ever frightening sailing through the icebergs ? 

  The only dangerous time we had was on the way back when we were trying to get away from the coast of Iceland and a whole series of fronts were driving us back into the coast . 

  We were heading for the Westerman Islands on the far south-east corner of Iceland and a front came in faster than Robin Knox-Johnston , the skipper , had anticipated . 

  This meant we had to turn round but we were now being driven into a shore . 

  We only cleared the vital point by 100 yards . 

  We cleared it at night but you could see the spray smashing up against the cliffs -- it was a pretty narrow escape . 

  I was on watch at the time getting colder and colder and wetter and wetter . 

  I think I was actually too cold and too wet to be too worried about the outcome . 

  And I had total confidence in Robin as , very touchingly , he had in me when we climbed on the mountain . 

  What was it like climbing somewhere no-one had ever explored before ? 

  It was wonderful . 

  Greenland is fantastic and I loved the travel . 

  We were going on cross-country skis pulling pulks ( little sledges ) . 

  That was brilliant and the mountain itself was a fine mountain . 

  Here there was confusion because we wanted to climb the highest point in the Lemon Mountains . 

  But when we got there we found that the mountain we had perceived from the map to be the Cathedral , and which everyone else had perceived to be the Cathedral , was in fact another mountain altogether . 

  We had to change where we were going and when we tried to climb it , it was much harder than I'd anticipated . 

  It was not the type of climb on which you wanted to be with a total beginner -- Robin . 

  On the first attempt we did not get to the top . 

  We got to the top of a very high pinnacle on a ridge and then turned back . 

  On the second attempt it was just Jim Lowther and myself , but once again we'd underestimated just how hard the upper part of the Cathedral was . 

  We got onto the summit crest but were forced to turn back . 

  Although we did not quite make the top , it was a good day's climbing . 

  How much time do you spend on expeditions a year ? 

  In an average year it's about six to eight weeks actually expeditioning . 

  I usually have one expedition a year . 

  How much time do you spend planning ? 

  It depends on the size of the expedition . 

  The beauty of small lightweight expeditions is that they do not take that long . 

  We've been working on the Panch Chule expedition for a year , but it's just the odd day basically . 

  Obviously as you get a little bit closer to it it gets rather more fraught . 

  How much training do you do before an expedition ? 

  Just moderate , no more . 

  I climb through the year and run a certain amount , but it's gentle jogging . 

  I have a moderate level of fitness throughout and I think that's what you really want for an expedition . 

  How have your family coped with you heading off on these sometimes very dangerous expeditions ? 

  Well we've managed to remain married and in love for 30 years , so that's not bad . 

  And we have a super relationship with our two boys . 

  How do you spend the rest of your time when you're not on or planning an expedition ? 

  I earn a living by writing . 

  I've nearly finished a book about Greenland to be called Sea , Ice and Rock , which is a joint book with Robin . 

  I give lectures in the autumn , I do quite a lot of management seminars and inspirational speaking at sales conferences . 

  I do TV work and a certain amount of broadcasting . 

  I do a fair amount of charitable work -- I was president of the BMC which I really enjoyed doing and I am president designate of the Council for National Parks which will come up in October . 

  This will involve a lot of work but it's something I am looking forward to . 

  I've got to assimilate a much broader kind of spectrum outside the interests of climbers in national parks . 

  I shall find that challenging , interesting , and probably quite difficult . 

  You've just done a TV series and book about the history of climbing . 

  Which feats have impressed you the most ? 

  I think the climber Messner is the greatest mountaineer of perhaps all time . 

  You just have to list his track record , the number of firsts and very innovative things that he did down the line . 

  Being the first to do it is not just an ego thing , it's also breaking new ground . 

  What impresses me in Messner is the combination he has of immense boldness and analytical power . 

  He knows when to turn back and he has turned back frequently when things are not right . 

  And he knows when to go on . 

  It's immensely impressive . 

  What are the common traits of climbers through the generations ? 

  You can recognise the modern climber in a lot of the old climbers . 

  The motivation has not changed -- the equipment has changed , some of the pressures have changed , the emphases have changed , but the actual essential personalities have hardly changed at all . 

  Through the whole history of climbing there's the struggle for risk and the unknown on one side , while on the other you've got the desire for safety and to have a safety net . 

  And you've also got man's desire to be sure of achieving success . 

  In a way , these two things have been in conflict right the way through the history of climbing . 

  And when it comes down to it , most of the ethical arguments are about these two differences of approach . 

  What plans have you for future expeditions ? 

  I am taking my sons and my brother to Kilimanjaro in August . 

  I am just about to go to Panch Chule which is a mountain in the Indian Himalaya . 

  It's an Indian/ British expedition with a good strong team . 

  I've been invited to go to Bhutan so I might go there . 

  And I want to get back into Tibet and I also want to go to Russia . 

  I like mountains around about the 6000 , lower 7000m range . 

  They're the unclimbed peaks , the unexplored peaks -- and they're a bit kinder to you as you get into your late fifties . 

  The problem is finding the time to do everything I'd like to do . 

  On top of the world . 

  The summit of Everest in 1985 

  A six part series about the history of climbing presented by Chris Bonington starts on Thursday August 13 on BBC 2 at 8.30pm . 

  Chris Bonington's book The Climbers to accompany the series will be published by Hodders and Stoughton on August 4 1992 price 16.95 . 

  GEAR TEST 

  LIGHTWEIGHT TROUSERS 

  A decent pair of walking trousers is an essential buy . 

  To help you choose the best we asked Paul Traynor to put six pairs to the test 

  Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years' experience of walking and backpacking at home and abroad . 

  Left to right : Rohan Bags -- old favourites ; Karrimor Tinamou -- simple and comfy ; Berghaus Windpants -- very light and quick drying ; Abris Jura -- a sound choice ; Regatta Action -- good for the price ; Jack Wolfskin Looping -- versatile design and light weight 

  Lightweight , quick-drying trousers are a real boon for the fast-moving traveller -- whether you're getting around on foot , by car or by plane . 

  But you do not have to be on the move to appreciate the advantages promised by the current designs on the market . 

  Comfort , practicality and ease of care are attractive to office workers and hill walkers alike and the flexibility of lightweight trousers means that most of us will end up owning a pair or two , regardless of our outdoor interest . 

  You will soon notice the advantages of trousers with good levels of wind resistance and with a degree of resistance to rain . 

  When wet these trousers dry quickly in a warm room -- quicker still if you're walking in a warm breeze . 

  All the trousers tested here were worn in a wide range of conditions and temperatures from late winter to spring . 

  I am a warm walker however , and prefer to wear light clothing whenever possible . 

  Others will , of course , prefer to wear something more substantial during colder weather . 

  All weights given refer to the extra-large size or equivalent . 

  Read on to see how well each pair measures up to makers' claims . 

  ROHAN BAGS 

  Designated use : general outdoor and travel wear . 

  Fabric : Airlight -- a 50/ 50 polyester/ cotton supposed to be " light and quick drying " 

  Pockets : two open side pockets , two zipped side pockets with bellows adjustment poppers , two zipped back pockets . 

  Other features : belt loops . 

  Zipped fly . 

  Strengthened key ring attachment . 

  Double thickness on seat and knees . 

  Water resistance : little resistance to persistent rain but the fabric dries out so quickly after shows that it's often not worth the bother of getting out your overtrousers . 

  Wind resistance : good . 

  I stayed comfortable even on very breezy , chilly days . 

  Drying time : fast -- wearable within three hours in a warm room , albeit with dampish waistband , pockets etc . 

  Paul's verdict : Bags have been around a long time now and Rohan can justifiably claim to have prompted other companies to come up with versions of their original . 

  I found them comfortable and versatile -- in warm weather I washed and wore them immediately and they dried out almost completely within 20 minutes . 

  Am I alone , though , in questioning the value of the poppers on the bellows side pockets ? 

  When lounging around I find these tend to dig in at the hips . 

  JACK WOLFSKIN LOOPING 

  Designated use : multi-use windproof trousers -- can be used all year if worn over fleece trousers or climbing tights . 

  Fabric : H2Off polyester microfibre , which claims to be " superlight , water repellent and quick-drying . " 

  Pockets : two zipped side pockets , one back pocket with a flap secured by Velcro , twin compartment leg pocket with a flap secured by Velcro . 

  Other features : elasticated waist with belt loops ( belt supplied ) . 

  No fly . 

  Adjustable at ankle by Velcro fastener . 

  Double thickness knee panels . 

  Water resistance : coped well with showers and persistent light rain , though some water penetrated in downpours . 

  Wind resistance : I had no complaints even on blustery days with snow underfoot . 

  Drying time : most of the trouser fabric dried very quickly -- within two hours in a warm room -- although the elasticated waistband took a while longer . 

  Paul's verdict : I was impressed by both the performance and flexibility of these trousers . 

  They coped well with steady rain making me question the need for overtrousers in milder seasons . 

  They felt comfortable worn next to the skin . 

  The elasticated waist and ankle adjusters mean they can be worn either track-suit-style or as " proper " trousers when a smarter look is needed . 

  Their versatility and light weight makes them attractive for backpacking -- albeit at a price . 

  KARRIMOR TINAMOU 

  Designated use : travel and active leisure wear . 

  Fabric : 65 % polyester/ 35 % cotton , which claims to be " ultra lightweight , wind and shower resistant " . 

  Pockets : two open side pockets , zipped back pocket ; leg pocket secured by popper -- OS map size . 

  Other features : semi-elasticated waistband with belt loops . 

  Zipped fly . 

  Water resistance : they stayed comfortable in a light drizzle , but wind-driven showers quickly penetrated the fabric . 

  Drying time : most of the fabric was dry enough to wear within three hours in a warm room , but the elasticated waistband and cotton pockets took considerably longer . 

  Paul's verdict : I liked the simplicity and comfort of the Tinamou trousers . 

  They're styled more like popular " canvas " trekking jeans than multi-zipped activity legwear , but have the advantages of lightness and quick-drying which makes them particularly suited for travel wear . 

  ABRIS JURA 

  Designated use : lightweight walking trousers for general and outdoor use . 

  Fabric : made from 50/ 50 polyester/ cotton , which claims to " pack small and dry quickly " . 

  Pockets : two open side pockets , two zipped side pockets , two zipped back pockets ; one zipped leg pocket -- just OS map size . 

  Other features : belted waist ( trousers are supplied with quick-release buckle belt ) . 

  Zipped fly . 

  Double thickness seat and knee panels . 

  Water resistance : steady rain will penetrate but the fabric holds its own against light drizzle and dries out quickly after showers . 

  Wind resistance : no complaints , even in the breeziest conditions . 

  Drying time : wearable after drying for three hours in a warm room . 

  The pockets and waistband take slightly longer to dry out completely . 

  Paul's verdict : These trousers were comfortable to wear and did the required job effectively . 

  Some nice points of detail -- like contrasting expansion panels on pockets -- catch the eye . 

  A sound choice . 

  BERGHAUS WINDPANTS 

  Designated use : lightweight windproof pants for a variety of activities . 

  Fabric : Airfoil , a 100 % polyester microfibre which claims to be " breathable , windproof and quick-drying giving some protection from drizzle and rain . " 

  Pockets : two zipped side pockets , one zipped back pocket . 

  Other features : elasticated drawstring at waist , elasticated ankle . 

  No belt loops . 

  No fly . 

  Water resistance : held off light showers well , though steady rain will penetrate . 

  Drying time : wearable within the hour after drying in a warm room -- if you do not mind a few minutes of clamminess at the obvious places where the material is thicker such as the pockets and waistband . 

  Paul's verdict : I found myself opting to wear or carry these simple track-suit-style pants more and more often . 

  They are very lightweight and proved ideal to use as a back up when walking or cycling in shorts . 

  They were also useful to pull on over fleece bottoms in colder weather . 

  They performed well despite the fact that you scarcely know you're wearing them . 

  They also pack away neatly into their own back pocket , with a small belt loop attached -- a nice touch . 

  REGATTA ACTION 

  Designated use : all outdoor activities and general use . 

  Fabric : 65 % polyester/ 35 % cotton which the manufacturers say is " easily laundered and quick drying . " 

  Pockets : two open side pockets , four zipped side pockets , two zipped back pockets , one zipped leg pocket . 

  Other features : belt loops . 

  Zipped fly . 

  Double thickness seat and knee panels . 

  Water resistance : water penetrates readily , but the trousers coped well with light drizzle . 

  Wind resistance : no complaints , even in bitterly cold conditions . 

  Drying time : wearable within five hours after drying in a warm room -- however the waistband took a little longer to dry . 

  Paul's verdict : considering the very low price the Action trousers performed pretty well . 

  They're relatively heavy , take longer to dry and some pocket seams were not properly finished -- but they remain a much better bet for walking than non-specialist alternatives . 

  I found them comfortable to use and easy to care for . 

  If more attention was paid to the basics and less to incorporating an impressive number of zips , these trousers would be even better value-for-money . 

  MARKET ROUND UP 

  BACKPACKING MEALS 

  Quick to cook , lightweight and nutritious , specialist backpacking meals make outdoor food preparation simple . 

  We take a look at what's in the shops 

  Raven Outdoor Cuisine 

  Design : a range of freeze-dried dehydrated food made with natural ingredients . 

  Varieties : the range includes breakfasts , lunches , dinners , side dishes and desserts . 

  Menus include quick porridge and hot bran muesli , Shepherd's pie and beef bourguignon and apple and strawberry dessert . 

  Cooking procedures : most of the meals do not need cooking , just add hot water and leave them to stand for a few minutes . 

  The foil packs have a flat bottom so that they can stay upright when water is being added up to the measuring mark on the pack . 

  The meals can then be eaten straight out of the pack . 

  Other features : the meals have a long shelf life and are light and compact to carry . 

  Peak Performance Meals 

  Design : a range of freeze dried vegetarian meals . 

  Cholesterol free . 

  Varieties : include beans n' toast , bubble and squeak , vegetable stroganoff and Lancashire hot pot . 

  Cooking procedures : add boiling water and leave for several minutes to rehydrate . 

  The re-hydration process can be speeded up by heating . 

  Other features : lightweight and nutritious . 

  Wynnster Outdoor Cuisine 

  Design : a range of nine main meals . 

  Varieties : pasta , chicken and mushroom , beef and cream sauce , marinated beef and vegetables , cod and parsley sauce , spaghetti bolognese , vegetarian goulash , beef bourguignon , vegetable stew and vegetarian stroganoff . 

  Cooking procedure : depending on the particular recipe , add cold or boiling water . 

  Then either leave to rehydrate , then eat or alternatively cook for a few minutes before eating . 

  Left : the Raven range includes breakfasts , lunches and diners . 

  Below : Peak Performance's meals are all vegetarian . 

  Bottom : some of Wynnster's nine main meals 

  NATURE WATCH 

  July 

  Richard Marpole highlights what you can see country-wide and outlines a fascinating walk in the Norfolk Broads 

  PEACOCK BUTTERFLY 

  The " eyes " on the wings of the peacock butterfly are a means of defence . 

  When threatened by a predator , the butterfly opens and closes its wings rapidly , flashing the eye spots , in order to frighten the predator away . 

  It lays its eggs on nettle leaves and the caterpillars feed off the nettles until they form chrysalises . 

  There is only one generation a year , flying from July through to the autumn . 

  Those seen in the spring will have hibernated over the winter in garden sheds or hollow trees . 

  If disturbed during hibernation , the peacock butterfly can make a hissing noise by rubbing its wings together . 

  EARLY MARSH ORCHID 

  Early marsh orchid dactylorhiza incarnata flowers from May through to July . 

  It has erect leaves , usually unspotted , which form a hood at the tip and are keeled -- that is they have a hard ridge running along the centre of the underside . 

  There are five subspecies distributed widely throughout the British Isles . 

  Although they vary , the most common colour is a pinkish purple . 

  KESTREL 

  The kestrel is our most common falcon , but what a delight it is to see it hunting in a natural habitat rather than at the edge of a motorway . 

  When looking for prey they will hover up to 300ft above the ground , using their tail and wings to stay in position . 

  Then they will suddenly swoop down to catch mammals or sometimes insects or worms . 

  They also prey on small birds . 

  Kestrels nest in a variety of places such as cliffs or crevices in buildings , or holes in trees . 

  They also use old crows' or pigeons' nests . 

  Sometimes they nest on the ground . 

  Four or five eggs are laid and incubated for about four weeks . 

  The young are fed by both parents and fledge around four weeks after hatching . 

  YELLOW FLAG 

  Yellow flag iris pseudacorus is commonly found at the sides of ponds and in wet meadows . 

  It grows up to four feet tall , with large yellow flowers and leaves which are sharp enough to cut the unwary . 

  The name " flag " may originate from the plant having first been used as a heraldic device by Clovis , king of the Franks in the 5th century . 

  However , the name may also be due to the appearance of the flowers , which go limp and hang from the stems as they get old . 

  WILD ANGELICA 

  Wild angelica angelica sylvestris is common in fens and damp woods . 

  It is a tall plant -- up to five feet high -- with purple stems and pink or white flowers at the end of thin stalks . 

  The flowers radiate like the spokes of an umbrella -- hence the name of the group to which this plant belongs -- the umbellifers . 

  Wild angelica's close relative angelica archangelica is made into candy by crystallising the stalks . 

  In London during the Great Plague people chewed on the root , believing that it would protect them from the disease . 

  COOT 

  The coot is one of the most common water birds with its white beak and face shield . 

  During the breeding season from mid May to August , it is strongly territorial and fiercely defensive to interlopers . 

  Its aggressive display , with its head pushed forward to emphasise the white face shield , is accompanied by a ringing call , similar to metal striking metal . 

  JULY IN THE NORFOLK BROADS 

  The origins of the Norfolk Broads have only become known in recent years . 

  In medieval times , peat digging for fuel was an important industry in the area . 

  In some places the peat was only a few feet deep whereas in others it went down several yards . 

  As the peat was removed , depressions were made in large areas of ground and the peat reserves were soon exhausted . 

  The clay exposed by the peat digging was also excavated and used in the manufacture of bricks and pottery . 

  In the middle ages , the sea level rose and the hollowed out ground filled with water -- the resulting water-filled depressions became what are now known today as the broads . 

  Today , many of the broads are just a fraction of their former size . 

  The changing vegetation at the water's edge has turned what was open water into , firstly , a wetland habitat dominated by alder and sallow trees , and then , as the ground has dried out , into mixed woodland . 

  Unfortunately silting has reduced the depth of some broads , and this , coupled with increased nutrient levels from sewerage outfall , together with run-off of fertilisers from surrounding farmland , has reduced the aquatic life . 

  Algal bloom , which smothers and kills aquatic wildlife , has become a familiar problem on many inland waters , but especially here in the Norfolk Broads . 

  Water that was clear and alive with wildlife as recently as the late 1940s is now murky and almost lifeless . 

  Much of the marshland surrounding the broads and rivers has been drained to make the land available for agricultural use . 

  Originally this was done using windpumps . 

  Sadly , the majority of these magnificent structures are derelict , having been replaced by more modern ( but less energy efficient ) diesel or electric pumps . 

  The more powerful modern pumps mean that the marshes no longer become flooded during the winter months , and as a consequence the water table has been lowered . 

  The drying out of the soils causes shrinkage , which ultimately leads to a lowering of the land levels . 

  Today , much of the land alongside the rivers is below sea level . 

  The Norfolk Naturalists Trust , the oldest country wildlife trust in the country , is working hard to correct some of the damage done to the environment . 

  In collaboration with the Broads Authority , English Nature and the National Rivers Authority , they have isolated Cockshoot Broad from the main river network and pumped out polluted sewage . 

  Within a few months , seeds -- which had lain dormant for many years -- germinated . 

  In 1989 the Broads were given National Park status . 

  The Broads Authority has to balance the needs of the local wildlife against the needs of the local people , local industry and tourism . 

  JULY WALK ON THE NORFOLK BROADS 

  This walk is suitable for both car and boat borne visitors , and can be started from several points other than Upton Dyke . 

  It is not a strenuous walk , nor is it a walk to be hurried as there is so much to see . 

  Bear in mind that the path , especially along the riverbanks , can be very muddy . 

  From the car park at Upon Dyke , follow the footpath which runs down the left side of the dyke . 

  Immediately you will see a boatyard on the left . 

  Just after the boatyard , again on the left , is the Palmers Post Mill which has been restored . 

  When , after half a mile , Upton Dyke reaches the River Bure , turn left along the river bank . 

  Continue following the Bure for two and a half miles until Thurne Mouth , the junction with the River Thurne . 

  There are several old windmills along the way . 

  Firstly , on the opposite bank , is Oby Mill , built in the mid 18th century . 

  Next is Upton Mill , which has been converted for residential use . 

  The grazing marshes adjacent to the river are an important wildlife habitat . 

  Look out for birds such as redshank and lapwing . 

  The drainage dykes are the breeding area for many species of dragonfly and they also contain a wide variety of wild plants . 

  Thurne Mouth is a good place to stop for a while and there is a seat to take your weight . 

  This is a busy junction , and the restored windmills in the distance make a picturesque backdrop to the many boats , especially the yachts , which gracefully cruise by . 

  Do not just watch the river though because the reed beds behind this point are the haunt of reed bunting and sedge warbler . 

  Other birds you could see along this stretch include oystercatchers with their black and white plumage , bright orange bills and piping call , black headed gulls , kestrels and of course mute swans . 

  Butterflies are numerous on a warm day -- including peacock , small tortoiseshell and brimstone . 

  The path follows the course of the River Bure to the ruins of St Benets Abbey on the far bank . 

  The remains are all that is left of a monastery which was founded early in the 11th century . 

  The path now follows Fleet Dyke until a corner where new edging work has been carried out on the sides of the bank . 

  From here the path is separated from the river by a narrow strip of trees -- mostly willow and alder . 

  After a further 400yds the path regains the river , for a short time , by some moorings near the entrance to South Walsham Broad . 

  Follow the path which heads away from the water beside a laurel hedge , and onto a gravelled road . 

  There are toilets on the left , and just after these , on the right , a shop selling ice creams . 

  Continue along the road , and 20 yds after the sharp left turn by the car park , look for a footpath sign on the left . 

  Follow the path across the field until it reaches a metal gate with an awkward stile beside it . 

  Cross the stile and turn left onto the lane , past a red-tiled cottage , until you reach a junction of tracks . 

  Turn right here leading onto a grassy track . 

  Follow this for a half a mile , past a huge thatched barn on the right , then Marsh Lodge on the left . 

  Continue until you come to the car park and the entrance to Upton Fen Nature Reserve , owned by the Norfolk Naturalists Trust . 

  There is a one and a half mile circular nature trail around the reserve , which is definitely worth doing . 

  Dogs are not allowed on the reserve . 

  Upton Fen is spring-fed and isolated from the polluted waters of the river system -- it is therefore an extremely valuable wildlife site . 

  Many insects can be found here including two rare species -- the swallowtail butterfly and the Norfolk aeshna dragonfly . 

  Plants of interest are milk parsley peucedanum palustre the foodplant of the swallowtail , hop humulus lupulus , yellow flag iris pseudacorus , angelica angelica sylvestris , marsh helleborine epipactis palustris and southern marsh orchid dactylorhiza incarnata . 

  There are also some fine examples of tussock sedge cavex appropinquata . 

  Reaching the reserve car park once more , turn left onto the track again . 

  After 200yds , at a cross roads , the route turns left onto the farm road through Holly Farm . 

  When the farm road turns right , by some chicken sheds , the path goes left towards a metal gate . 

  Just before the gate the path turns right , between woodland on the left and a hedge on the right . 

  The path here can be very wet , but planks have been laid down over the worst parts . 

  This is yet another area rich in wild flowers . 

  After half a mile the path emerges onto a road . 

  Turn left along this road for three quarters of a mile until the road turns sharp right to become Marsh Road . 

  Go straight on here , down Back Lane , reaching the Upton Dyke car park in half a mile . 

  Oby Mill , built in the mid 18th century 

  BUYERS' GUIDE 

  SPRAYWAY OSPREY OVERTROUSERS 

  I think you should give as much thought to choosing waterproof trousers as you do to choosing a waterproof top . 

  Nothing is worse than walking in wet trousers for long periods of time , so the overtrousers you select should give as good a service as your jacket . 

  On one day during the test , I set off in a whiteout and finished , 12 hours later , in a torrential downpour . 

  When I finally took off the overtrousers , the fleece trousers I was wearing underneath were completely dry , which is what I would have expected from their three-layer Gore-Tex construction . 

  Other features include : an elasticated waist with an adjustable drawcord and zips running from the hem of the trousers up to knee height . 

  When unzipped the generous fabric panels flare open making it easy to put the trousers on even over large boots -- an important consideration . 

  The trousers also have a handy-to-get-at front pocket with a Velcro-fastening storm flap . 

  I tested the Osprey overtrousers for four months during the winter and was very impressed with their performance . 

  They are easy to wear , comfortable and give good leg room . 

  NIKON SPORTING II 8 x 40 BINOCULARS 

  Design : a new sporting range of binoculars . 

  All models are coated with hard wearing rubber for greater shock resistance . 

  THE VANGO EXODUS TRAVELLER 

  Design : a convertible rucksack/ suitcase with a Quick Adjustment back system and padded hip belt . 

  The pack is divided into two parts -- the main section opens like a suitcase with a bottom partition for sleeping bags , dirty washing etc . 

  A 20 litre daysack zips onto the front of the sack . 

  The pack features brass padlocks for the two main zips , an adjustable shoulder carrying strap and sturdy handle . 

  ROHAN SHEARWATER JACKET 

  Design : new to this year's Rohan range , the Shearwater Gore-Tex jacket is suitable for activities such as backpacking and skiing , along with everyday use . 

  The Shearwater is a unisex design and lightweight , weighing in at 607g . 

  Features : a two-way front zip fastens to above chin level -- there is even a fleece-lined chinguard . 

  The main zip is protected by a double front storm flap which has a rain gutter . 

  Rain and draughts are also kept at bay by the incorporation of a peaked hood ( which rolls away ) , adjustable Velcro cuffs and an elasticated waist and hem cords . 

  The jacket also features two zipped fleece-lined pockets and an interactive zip system allowing you to zip in a fleece jacket for an extra warm lining in cold conditions . 

  Material : made from Gore-Tex and Tactel , the jacket is waterproof , windproof and breathable . 

  STOP PRESS The Shearwater jacket was part of the first prize in our Rohan competition in the June issue , but unfortunately the colours reproduced badly . 

  These are the correct colours , and if you'd still like to enter the competition to win over 1,000 of Rohan gear , contact Closing date is June 30 , 1992 . 

  THERMOS EXPLORER FLASKS 

  Design : three sizes of tough stainless steel drinks flasks designed for outdoor use . 

  Larger sizes come with a foldable carrying handle and shoulder strap . 

  WYNNSTER PADDED TRAVEL POUCH 

  Design : travel pouch with one main padded compartment and numerous smaller zipped pockets in the lid and on the front of the pouch . 

  The pouch has an adjustable shoulder strap which unclips to double as a waistbelt . 

  GEAR GUIDE 

  BOOTS 

  Buying the right boots or shoes which give you the most comfortable fit is an absolute must . 

  Our comprehensive gear guide tells you all you need to know to make the right choice 

  Good footwear is the most important item of kit for any walker . 

  However , these days the choice of styles available is so wide that it is easy to become confused when making a purchase . 

  Your best bet is to seek out specialist footwear which will prove safe and comfortable in use , although not overspecified for the walking you have in mind -- in other words , do not buy a pair of heavy duty mountain boots if you only intend going for walks on country lanes ! 

  Comfortable boots or shoes , for whatever purpose , are a must . 

  If your footwear is uncomfortable you will not only end up with sore feet or blisters but you could become a danger to yourself or , worse , still , to others who might have to come and rescue you . 

  CHOOSING 

  Before you even set out to buy a pair of boots , study the manufacturers' catalogues . 

  Most manufacturers will be happy to send you their catalogues and give you the name of your nearest stockist . 

  If you plan to walk primarily on lowland ground in the summer , then lightweight boots or , in many cases , shoes will be all you need . 

  If you are planning to use the footwear for hillwalking as well , then a " general " walking boot , giving your ankles good support , will serve you well . 

  Steer clear of thick heavy mountain boots , as your feet will tire easily , unless you're planning some serious winter walking where you might need to use crampons . 

  Most boots are made from leather or suede , and are available in different weights and with different soles to suit many purposes . 

  If you prefer very light footwear , fabric boots might serve you well ; but remember that they are not waterproof unless a waterproof membrane is used in their construction . 

  FITTING 

  Whatever footwear you choose , it needs to be comfortable and give your feet proper support . 

  When you go to buy your boots or shoes , take along the socks you intend to wear for walking . 

  Most people will be happy with one pair of good loop-stitched socks inside their boots , but if you are used to wearing two pairs of socks , then take them with you . 

  Never rush and buy boots at the last minute . 

  Take your time and try on several pairs until you are certain they will be comfortable . 

  If you are not sure about their comfort , then do not buy until you have had a chance to try other boots elsewhere . 

  Some of the better quality boots will be available in a choice of width fittings , and if you have particularly broad or narrow feet make sure you tell the shop assistant . 

  Do not be tempted to get a boot several sizes larger than you normally need to get the correct width fitting ; a boot that is too long will not be comfortable , and after some use you will find that the leather will stretch and your foot will not be properly supported . 

  When you try on a pair of boots , push your foot forward into the boot until it can go no further , then slide your index finger down the back behind your heel . 

  There should just be room for your finger , and your toes should not feel cramped . 

  When the boot is laced up , your heel should be held firmly and you should not be able to move it about . 

  Make sure that the ankle cuff is comfortable and does not catch your ankle bone in the wrong place . 

  If the cuff catches , the style is wrong for your shape of foot . 

  Walk around the shop and make sure your feet feel comfortable . 

  A good way of checking that there is no unnecessary movement is to kick the toe of the boot against a carpeted stair riser . 

  If you cannot do this in the shop ask the shopkeeper whether you can try them out at home . 

  Most shops are prepared for your to do this with expensive boots , but do not expect them to be exchanged if they've been marked in any way or worn outside ! 

  Buying boots by mail order is a risky business . 

  If you have no alternative , because you live miles away from a good boot retailer , then choose a reliable company prepared to exchange the boots if they do not fit properly . 

  Here again , do not expect them to take the boots back if they've been marked or worn outside . 

  BREAKING IN . 

  With the advent of softer leathers and fabric boots breaking in your boots is not the problem it used to be . 

  However , you will still need to get used to wearing them before embarking on a long trek . 

  Go for short walks near your home , making the walks progressively longer until you are well used to the boots . 

  You might even try walking to work in them . 

  If you feel a " hot spot " -- a sure sign of a blister beginning to form , change into your normal footwear and let your feet recover before having another go . 

  You should not get blisters if you have taken the trouble to fit your boots as we have suggested . 

  However if you are prone to sore feet , treat them in the old-fashioned way by rubbing the soles and heels with surgical spirit to harden the skin . 

  Then powder them afterwards when the skin is dry , with a good quality talcum powder . 

  There are also special protective plasters which can be used to cushion vulnerable spots . 

  CONSTRUCTION 

  Boots and shoes normally consist of three basic component parts -- an upper , a midsole and a sole unit , although there are variations on the theme . 

  Normally the upper part of the boot is attached to the midsole , either by sewing or cementing , and this whole unit is then attached to the sole . 

  Traditionally this is done by sewing the two together with welt stitches . 

  This is where the rim of the leather upper is turned outwards at the bottom and stitched through the midsoles to the sole . 

  The other traditional method is to turn the edges of the upper inwards and sew it to the midsole with Blake stitches . 

  However it is more common nowadays for adhesives to be used to bond the sole to the upper . 

  Many boots have a protective rubber or composition rand around the welt to prevent water getting in . 

  Good bonding with reliable adhesives also makes for a good leak-free join . 

  UPPERS 

  Leather is traditionally used for boots and shoes . 

  It's a natural material so it breathes , allowing the feet to breathe as well . 

  Calf leather is extensively used for walking boots as it is relatively soft and easy to break in , while hide will be used for heavy-duty mountaineering boots . 

  Traditionally tanned leathers will need to be treated with a good wax proofing agent to make them water resistant , although some leathers are now treated at the tanneries with special waterproof finishes . 

  Less expensive boots are made from split leather or suede , and some have a polyurethane coating to make them waterproof but this does make the boot less breathable . 

  Fabric boots are light and comfortable , and are ideal for use in hot weather . 

  If they do not contain a waterproof membrane such as Gore-Tex or Sympatex , you can obtain spray-on products to give them a water-repellent finish . 

  Rubber and plastic boots are intended for use in very wet places but will not allow the feet to breathe . 

  ANKLE CUFF 

  This is the padded collar of the boot which protects and supports the ankle . 

  The height , shape and flexibility varies according to the make and model of the boot , and what suits one person will not suit another . 

  Higher cuffs generally give more support in rough terrain , but the more experienced user may prefer the greater mobility offered by lower cuff designs . 

  It's all a matter of personal preference and comfort . 

  TONGUE 

  Boots and shoes have a tongue which may also be padded to protect the foot from the pressure of tight lacing . 

  Unless the tongue is of the bellows type , ( ie : gusseted and stitched to both sides of the opening ) water will find its way in . 

  Sometimes a compromise is made in cheaper boots and the tongues are stitched half way . 

  LACING 

  Most boots will have a mixture of D-rings and hooks to keep the laces in place and to speed up the lacing process . 

  Some boots have ordinary eyelets , but these can be a nuisance when you need to thread up muddy laces . 

  Some cheaper boots have plastic hooks which are vulnerable to breakage . 

  SOLES 

  The sole of the boot is your contact with the ground . 

  Look on it in the same way as the treads on your bike or car tyres . 

  A good tread will generally give a good grip , but as with a car , watch out on wet ground ! 

  Both Vibram and Skywalk soles , and other similar types , will give problems on wet ground unless you take care . 

  It is necessary to keep your balance by not over-extending your stride , especially when coming down steep slopes . 

  Lose your concentration and you could lose your footing . 

  Vibram and similar soles are not all heavy -- they are available in a variety of weights , including lightweight units which are designed for walking shoes . 

  Deep tread patterns can damage the ground , and more environmentally-friendly patterns are now available . 

  Boots with a cut-away heel tend to do less damage than traditionally-patterned ones , but walkers need to develop a new style of walking when using them , particularly on steep ground . 

  MIDSOLE 

  The layer between the sole unit and the insole of the boot is known as the midsole . 

  This is specially constructed to give the correct amount of flexibility depending on the activity the boot is designed for . 

  At one time the midsoles of all mountain boots incorporated a steel or wooden shank in their construction , but modern techniques mean that now manufacturers almost always use injection-moulded plastics to give the right degree of flex and/ or stiffening . 

  A shock-absorbing layer may be incorporated into the midsole , or a wedge of similar material used to cushion the base of the heel against the impact of hard ground . 

  INSOLE 

  Most modern walking boots come with removable footbeds or insoles , allowing greater flexibility of fit . 

  They are very comfortable to wear and give excellent support to the arch of the foot , as well as allowing a better fit around the heel . 

  LINING 

  Most good walking boots are fully lined . 

  The most common lining is leather or Cambrelle , a moisture absorbing synthetic fabric , although other fabrics may be used . 

  Some boots may be insulated with Thinsulate or a fibrepile lining and others may incorporate breathable , waterproof membranes . 

  CARE OF BOOTS 

  Always wash dirty leather boots with clean water , using a brush to remove any mud . 

  Dry them gently , with newspaper inside to take up excess moisture , and never subject them to direct heat . 

  Do not try to force-dry them in front of a fire or on a radiator . 

  When the boots are dry , treat them with a proprietary wax , such as Nikwax or Granger's G-Wax -- both of these are recommended by the major boot manufacturers . 

  Boots which have been factory-treated and given a waterproof finish should not normally be given a wax treatment when new , but should be treated with ordinary shoe polish . 

  Always follow the manufacturers' instructions . 

  The stitching around the tongue and other points which are vulnerable to water entry should , however , have wax applied and worked into the stitching . 

  Most of these treatments will eventually wear off with use , and boots should then be treated with a proprietary wax dressing . 

  Untreated leather will dry out and crack , making it stiff and hard , and no longer waterproof . 

  Fabric boots should be scrubbed with clean water to remove the dirt and allowed to dry naturally . 

  When dry , a propriety spray treatment , such as Grangers' G-Sport or Texnik from Nikwax may be used on them . 

  SERVICING 

  Boots and shoes need to be kept in good repair , otherwise they are a potential hazard to the wearer . 

  Repairs can be undertaken by a good skilled boot repairer , but if you have difficulty finding someone locally you can send your boots or shoes to Shoecare at Preston . 

  They are the official repairers for most of the leading makes and can also provide original replacements for soles and midsoles . 

  Contact : 

  GAITERS 

  In adverse conditions gaiters help to keep stones , mud and water out of your boots , and are particularly effective when walking through heather . 

  Most are attached to the sole of the boot by means of a strap under the instep and a hook secured to the front lacing . 

  Gaiters are normally fastened by a zip at the back , but there are some with a front zip . 

  Yeti gaiters are made by Berghaus to fit their boots . 

  These gaiters cover the whole boot and have a rubber rand which gives a watertight seal . 

  CRAMPONS 

  These metal frames with spikes on them can be attached to certain types of boot to give good grip in snow and ice . 

  If you are likely to be out in such conditions , seek the advice of your retailer when buying your boots . 

  You will definitely need heavier and stiffer boots for such conditions , and only certain boots are suitable for use with crampons . 

  GLOSSARY 

  Anfibio Leather : a specially treated hide leather which is durable , supple and water-resistant . 

  Ankle cuff : the padded collar which supports the ankle . 

  Bellows tongue : a gusseted tongue which is fully stitched on either side of the boot opening preventing water from getting inside . 

  Calf : very soft leather which , as its name implies , comes from calves . 

  Various grades are available , and the best is generally used for top-quality mountain and walking boots . 

  Cambrelle : a special lining , developed by ICI , which is very hard wearing and will not distort , fray or rot . 

  It is air and moisture permeable , therefore cool in summer and warm in winter . 

  Chrome leather : leather which is tanned solely with chromium salts . 

  Heat and perspiration resistant . 

  Dual-density : double thickness sole of a boot , made from two different types of rubber and designed to absorb shock and reduce fatigue . 

  The outer , harder sole is moulded first and the second , shock-absorbing layer is added to it . 

  The whole boot is then mounted on that unit . 

  EVA : a lightweight shock-absorbing rubber-like material used as a mid-sole or wedge insert , which protects the foot from impact on hard ground . 

  Full-grain : leather that has the grain layer substantially intact and which is finished on the grain side . 

  Galusser : high quality leather from the Swiss tannery of the same name . 

  It has a thickness of about 3mm and is used for heavy mountain boots . 

  Hide : the skin of a full grown animal from which a leather is produced that is heavier and tougher than calf . 

  Injection-moulding : a method of making a sole unit , for example using PVC or other thermoplastic material , by melting the material and injecting it under pressure into the mould cavity 

  Last : a solid form of wood , plastic or metal on which a boot or shoe is built , and which gives its shape to the boot or shoe . 

  Lining : the part of the boot which lies directly against your feet . 

  It may be made from leather or fabric , and my incorporate a breathable membrane , such as Gore-Tex or Sympatex . 

  Mid-sole : the layer between the sole and insole of the boot , which is anatomically shaped and designed to give the correct amount of flex and support for the activity for which the boot is designed . 

  Often a shock-absorbing layer or wedge is incorporated . 

  The thickness and flex are graded according to use . 

  Nubuck : cattle hide leather buffed on the grain side to give a very fine velvety surface . 

  White or coloured , it is often used in women's boots and fashionable outdoor footwear . 

  PU-coated leather : a cheaper , lightweight leather which is given a polyurethane coating to make it more waterproof . 

  Rand : a protective strip of rubber covering the join between the upper and the sole . 

  Skywalk : a brand name for a sole with a good tread pattern and grip . 

  Sole : that part of the boot which is in contact with the ground . 

  It may incorporate a shock-absorbing layer , avoiding the necessity of a mid-sole . 

  Sorbothane : the trade mark of the Leyland and Birmingham Rubber Co. for their composite material which absorbs shock , and is used for footbeds and shock-absorbent insoles . 

  Suede : the reverse side of a skin , having a soft fabric-like texture . 

  Easy to dye , it is used with other fabrics such as Cordura for lightweight and fashion boots . 

  Fashionable dyes can easily be used . 

  Thermoplastic : a synthetic rubber related to resin-rubber but which can be fused by heat and therefore processed into soles by injection moulding . 

  Thinsulate : an insulation material made from microfibres by ICI . 

  A special type is made for interlining boots going between the inner and the outer which is very thin but strong and has high warmth value . 

  Tongue : the piece of fabric or leather which is attached to the inside of the boot under the opening . 

  Triple Density : a dual density sole unit with an additional piece of EVA foam on top . 

  This construction is normally used for stiffer mountain boots , and the middle layer is normally the hardest . 

  Upper : the upper part of the boot which encases the foot and which is sewn or glued to the sole unit . 

  Vibram : a brand name for a traditional tough and heavy-duty patterned sole which wears well . 

  Welt : the rim sewn to a shoe or boot upper , to which the sole is attached . 

  COMPETITION 

  12 PAIRS OF BOOTS TO WIN 

  PRIZES 

  Twelve lucky winners will soon be the proud owners of a top quality pair of fabric boots from Line 7 . 

  The first six male entries drawn from the hat will receive a pair of GT 35s while the first six female entries will win a pair of Lady GTs -- these are specially designed for women who tend not to want high ankle support . 

  Both styles come with an impressive array of features including Gore-Tex lining , Cordura upper and Vibram sole . 

  In the shops these stylish , high performance boots would cost you 89.99 ( GT 35 , shown left ) and 84.99 ( Lady GT , shown top left ) . 

  HOW TO ENTER 

  To have a chance of winning one of these fabulous pairs of boots all you have to do is find the following eight words in the word square : LINE 7 , GORETEX , GT RIFT , RAIDER , PANDA , RANGER , ROVER and LADY GT . 

  In order to make it just a little bit trickier the words can read forwards , backwards , up , down and diagonally . 

  Once you've found the words ring them with a pen , cut out the wordsquare or photocopy it if you do not want to damage your magazine , and send it to us here at : Make sure you also enclose your address and boot size . 

  All entries must arrive no later than last post on Friday July 31 . 

  OUT &amp;amp; ABOUT 

  Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country . 

  Walks compiled by Catherine Moore 

  COIRE LAGGAN FROM GLEN BRITTLE 

  Coire Lagan is a wild , rocky corrie in the heart of Skye's Cuillin mountains . 

  It's thought by many to be the most beautiful of the Cuillin corries and takes the hillwalker in among the most impressive peaks . 

  The route starts at the Glen Brittle campsite , next to the beach . 

  You pick up the path after you've climbed the fence behind the campsite toilet . 

  Follow the path upwards , over the moorland . 

  The path goes to the right to reach a stream at a small gorge and then goes slightly to the left to pass Loch an Fhir-bhallaich . 

  You then go around the south-west shoulder of Sgurr Dearg to reach the corrie . 

  The last bit of ascent into the upper coire is stony , but it does not take too long to cross the ice-worn boiler plates to reach the lovely little lochan nestling there . 

  Above , to the north is the west ridge of Sgurr Dearg . 

  At the back of the corrie is the Inaccessible Pinnacle of Sgurr Dearg and Sgurr Mhic Choinnich . 

  And towering above is Sgurr Alasdair which at 3,251 feet is the highest peak in the Cuillin . 

  Below , the islands of Rum and Canna can be seen and on the horizon to the west you can look over from the hills of South Uist to Barra Head . 

  To get back to base retrace your steps out of Coire Lagan , but head around the north side of Loch an Fhir-bhallaich . 

  Cross the moor heading north-west to arrive at the Glen Brittle Hut . 

  Follow the road back round to the Glen Brittle campsite . 

  Recommended by the Skye Mountain Rescue Team . 

  GLENMORE RIDGE TREK 

  The Glenmore Forest Park lies around the shores of the lovely Loch Morlich in the Cairngorms . 

  There are plenty of activities on offer there including a permanent orienteering course -- a special Wayfaring pack designed to accompany the course is available from the Forest Park Visitor Centre . 

  In addition there are two low-level ski slopes and tows and the Forestry Commission has created two interesting cross country ski trails . 

  There are plenty of great walks to try out in the forest itself and some of the surrounding peaks -- the forest boundaries include some of the lower Cairngorm summits . 

  Some of the walks are waymarked with different coloured trail markers showing some of the best routes . 

  One of the most challenging walks is the Ridge Trek , a strenuous hike leading up to and along the ridge of the Kincardine Hills on the northern edge of the forest park . 

  You will find your way along the route by following the orange waymarkers . 

  Look out for the forest wildlife on the way , red and roe deer live here as do pine martens and red squirrels , badgers , wildcats and mountain hares . 

  Birdwatchers should keep an eye out for a variety of birds including capercaillies , crested tits and crossbills . 

  From the Glenmore car park the trail follows the forestry road to Badgaduish in the heart of the forest . 

  The road continues past the buildings and after JJ mile the trail runs off through the trees to the forest perimeter . 

  From here the route climbs steeply to the summit of Craiggowrie at 2,240ft and follows the undulating ridge south east to Creagan Gorm at 2,403ft . 

  There's one last peak on the route , Meall a Bhuchaille -- the Shepherd's Hill -- at 2,200ft . 

  The path then descends to the Pass of Ryvoan and from here back to the Glenmore car park . 

  Recommended by the Forestry Commission 

  BLOODY BUSH AND GREY LADS 

  Park your car 4 miles north of Newcastleton at the sign " Lewisburn via Bloody Bush " , past Dinlabyre Farm . 

  Go through the small gate on the west side of the road and follow the track . 

  A short path through the wood on the left leads you to the Dinlabyre Ayle . 

  Continuing along the track you pass Mountain View Cottage . 

  The track then goes up through the forest to the crest of the hill . 

  The path continues for around a mile to the Bloody Bush pillar -- named after a dispute over where exactly the border ran . 

  From the Bloody Bush pillar retrace your steps , going back into Scotland until just before the summit of the hill you see a small cairn on the right . 

  Leave the path and walk along the hillside until you come to three prominent cairns -- the Grey Lads . 

  From here descend into Liddesdale , aiming towards a group of large green farm sheds across the valley . 

  Pass a small shed on your left and go through a gate until you reach the Larriston Burn . 

  Follow the track which leads downstream and when it divides , turn right into a field . 

  The track continues until you come to a ford . 

  Once across the ford leave the track and walk through the fields by the burn side . 

  Your way will eventually be blocked by a stone dyke , but if you stay near the burn you shall find a gap . 

  Climb over the fence , ford the burn again to reach the main road . 

  Turn left , and after about a mile you shall reach your starting point . 

  Recommended by the Scottish Borders Tourist Board . 

  THE LANGBAURGH LOOP 

  The Langbaurgh Loop is an open challenge walk of 38 miles running through the county of Cleveland . 

  As the name suggests , it's a circular route and takes the walker over some of the most beautiful countryside in the north-east . 

  Some of the walk is waymarked with green/ yellow arrows though as much of it is over rarely used rights of way you shall need to keep your OS maps close at hand . 

  Travelling in a clockwise direction the route proceeds from Cat Nab , Saltburn along part of the Cleveland Way and along the cliff edge down to the beach at Cattersty Sands . 

  Continue to Skinningrove then go back on the cliffs above Hummersea Scar and over to the cottages of Upton . 

  Passing to the east of the buildings at Upton the route goes on to cross the A174 road to the east of Loftus . 

  You then go south , to meet a minor road known as South Town Lane which you follow for around 500 yards after which you must branch off to cross a plantation called the Warren . 

  Continue westwards to the village of Liverton following the B1366 south for JJ mile when you branch off on a track on the right then go left to pass Lane Head Farm and Stubdale Farm . 

  Walk on to Robin Hoods Butts . 

  The route then heads west over Gerrick Moor to meet a moor road at White Cross and on through Westworth Wood into Guisborough Wood . 

  The next section of the loop passes west through the wood reaching Highcliff Nab and skirting Hutton Lowcross Woods to the south to reach Roseberry Topping . 

  From here head due north to monument on top of Eston Nab . 

  From Eston Nab the route goes southeast and then east past Poplar Farm and through a wooded area to Park Farm . 

  Beyond Park Farm the track goes into Park Wood and travels east through the wood , emerging and passing around North Cote Farm . 

  After following Wilton Lane to the north for around JJ mile the route goes right to Dunsdale Farm and on to meet the B1269 . 

  It then reaches Sandy Lane , a metalled road , right off the B1269 , leading to New Marske . 

  The route then goes through Errington Woods to the edge of Beacon Moor . 

  The route returns to Cat Nab at Saltburn via the roundabout of the A1085 and A174 roads , following the A174 towards Saltburn for JJ mile . 

  Opposite a riding stable follow a track leading past Windy Hill farm and to the beach . 

  From here the seashore is followed on to Cat Nab . 

  THE SILURIAN WAY 

  Grizedale Forest is in the middle of the southern half of the Lake District , in between Lake Windermere and Coniston Water . 

  The Silurian Way is a nine and a half mile route which takes you round the central area of the forest reaching its high point at Carron Crag at 1,031ft . 

  It's not an especially taxing route and is waymarked for its whole length with green markers . 

  It gets its name from the Silurian Epoch -- a period around 450 million years ago when the rocks which make up the skeleton and the soil of the Grizedale Forest were formed . 

  The grey slates and shales of the Silurian rock are obvious as you walk . 

  The route begins from the visitor centre , in the middle of the forest just off the main forest road . 

  From here you walk north-east following forest paths and tracks for just under a mile . 

  The route then curves around to head south towards Grizedale Tarn . 

  Continue on tracks heading east around the bottom of the tarn and after around 1:3 of a mile turn right and head south . 

  After around 2:3 of a mile the route curves around as though it's heading towards the village of Satterthwaite only to curve round back east -- keep a look out for Borck Crags , rocky outcrops you can see to your left . 

  The route then heads south west to Force Mills . 

  At Force Mills , follow the road leading up to Satterthwaite , keep on it as it crosses over Grizedale Beck . 

  Turn left off the road just before it reaches the next beck . 

  The route continues for a short way beside the beck , crossing it and turning right to head first slightly north-east and then north-west until a small beck is crossed , and then another by the Cortina Bridge -- named after a Ford Cortina crashed here in one of the Lombard RAC rallies . 

  From here the route continues north , up through Hall Wood to reach Carron Crag , then north for JJ mile before turning south-east to arrive back at the centre . 

  AYSGARTH FALLS AND BOLTON CASTLE 

  The Aysgarth Falls are one of the loveliest sights in the Yorkshire Dales . 

  The walk starts from the Aysgarth Falls National Park Centre car park . 

  You leave by the fenced footpath at the entrance , turn right at the road and cross into Freeholders' Wood and follow the hard path towards the Lower Falls . 

  At the other side of the wood go through the gate into the field . 

  Follow the path to a signpost marked Castle Bolton . 

  Head to the viewing platform and then turn right through the wood and go back to the field turning right down the hard path and going back to the Castle Bolton signpost . 

  Follow a wooden fence to cross a stile and head to the waymarked gate downhill from the farm buildings on the left . 

  Follow the track through the farm , behind the farmhouse . 

  When you come across a faint track alongside a wire fence on the right follow it . 

  Then cross the stile and keep heading north east , following signs for Castle Bolton and you shall join the enclosed Thoresby Lane by a wooden stile . 

  Stay on this road to join the metalled road at Low Thoresby Farm , and cross the footbridge on the left . 

  Pass over a broken wall and turn sharp right . 

  Cross the stile near an electricity pole and continue to the main road . 

  Turn left on the road and walk for around 900 yards before turning right onto a path which leads up to the old railway and joins a road up to Castle Bolton Village . 

  Follow the road west and continue along the gravel road signposted to Askrigg . 

  Walk past three metal gates along the track and go right uphill . 

  Go past the small wood and past a gate , continue with the wall on your left and through another gate . 

  Turn sharp right downhill and uphill to go through another gate . 

  Bear left , cross Beldon Beck and walk to a gate signed Caperby . 

  Go left over a low ridge and downhill . 

  Keep left along the wall and down to a gully with Caperby below . 

  Go into Caperby , turn right at the main road and walk to the Wheatsheaf Inn . 

  Opposite the inn go through a gate signed to Aysgarth . 

  Go through a gate on the right with a wall on your left . 

  Cross the lane and take the Aysgarth path . 

  You will eventually join the road back to the park centre . 

  SHINING TOR AND GOYT VALLEY 

  This is a classic walk through the western Peak District taking in Shining Tor and Cats Tor and returning by the reservoirs and woodlands of Goyt Valley . 

  The walk starts from the Cat &amp;amp; Fiddle pub on the A537 to the west of Buxton . 

  From the pub turn right to walk north-north-west along the road to meet a footpath on the right where the road bends . 

  Follow this path to a footpath junction then bear right to cross a stile . 

  Go north-north-east again to the path signed Shining Tor/ Pym's Chair . 

  Follow the path to the summit of Shining Tor and carry on along the right hand side of the wall to eventually ascend Cats Tor . 

  Continue on the path and join the road at Pym's Chair . 

  Turn right along the road , and after 150 yards go over two stiles on the left and cross the moorland to the road . 

  Follow the path which runs parallel to the road on its eastern side up to Windgather Rocks . 

  Go along the rocks , descending the path which goes through a broken wall and joins a farm track opposite some farm buildings . 

  Turn right and continue east to the wall corner and then south-east to cross the stile at the edge of the woods . 

  Go east to meet farm road . 

  Walk along the road until you come to Overton Hall Farm where you bear sharp right down bend in track . 

  Continue on this track , cross Mill Clough and go on past Knipe Farm and aim for the corner of Fernlee Reservoir . 

  Follow the western sides of Fernlee and Errwood reservoirs going south . 

  Cross the bridge at Shooter's Clough and bear right to a wooden information post . 

  Go left at the post and descent the track leading to a footbridge over a stream . 

  Go right alongside the brook to reach the ruins of Errwood Hall . 

  From here follow the red markers to sign for Moor Edge and go left to cross Shooter's Clough Brook . 

  Continue on a clear path up the hillside to reach a stile on the ridge . 

  By now you should have picked up the signs directing you back to the Cat &amp;amp; Fiddle . 

  You will need to retrace your steps on the path you originally took to get part of the way to Shining Tor leading to the A537 . 

  Recommended by HF Holidays who use the above route on their walking holidays from their house at Dovedale . 

  For details contact HF on 

  THE WEAVERS' WAY 

  The Weavers' Way runs for 56 miles through the varied scenery of north-east Norfolk , from Cromer to Great Yarmouth . 

  Starting from the undulating farmland and woodland of the north the route passes through the Broadland river valleys with their traditional grazing marshes . 

  Then to the south of the route you travel through Halvergate Marshes , land reclaimed from the sea . 

  The route is waymarked throughout its length and uses footpaths , sections of disused railway line and some minor roads . 

  It gets its name because of the one-time importance of the weaving industry in the area . 

  From Meadow Car Park , between Louden Road and Meadow Road in Cromer the way goes towards Felbrigg . 

  Here there's the possibility of a diversion to Felbrigg Hall -- a Jacobean house now run by the National Trust . 

  With Felbrigg left behind the route continues to Hanworth then over Thwaite Common and on to the village of Erpingham . 

  You reach the town of Aylsham via Calthorpe and Blickling . 

  Again there's the possibility of a diversion to Blickling Hall , another Jacobean property owned by the National Trust . 

  From Aylsham to Stalham most of the way is made up of three sections of the old Midland and Great Northern Railway line which used to run between Great Yarmouth and King's Lynn . 

  On the way the route passes through the town of North Walsham and follows a section of the North Walsham and Dilham Canal before cutting over the Stalham . 

  To the south-east of Stalham you arrive at the Hickling Broad Nature Reserve -- an important site for breeding and over-wintering birds . 

  The way goes on to cross the B1152 and follow the River Thurne until it goes past Acle and on to Halvergate Marshes . 

  Halvergate Marshes are one of the most important areas of low lying marshland in the country and are an Environmentally Sensitive Area . 

  The Weavers' Way reaches its end at the railway station in Great Yarmouth after running around the north side of Breydon Water . 

  THE HANGERS WAY 

  To the north of Petersfield is a series of steep-sided hills called the Hampshire Hangers . 

  Running north from Petersfield to the town of Alton , the 17 mile Hangers Way follows the line of the Hangers and takes the walker through grasslands and woodlands through some of Hampshire's best countryside . 

  The route is marked with Hangers Way signs . 

  Starting in Petersfield , on the High Street where the railway crosses the road , the route makes its way to the village of Steep and up onto Ashford Hill via Ashford Chace . 

  It then goes on to the Shoulder of Mutton Hill , noted for its flower rich grassland . 

  At the top of the Shoulder of Mutton Hill is the Poet Stone , dedicated to the memory of the poet Edward Thomas who died at the battle of Arras in 1917 . 

  Small woods and hidden valleys characterise the next section of the route to the village of Hawkley and on to Hawkley Hanger . 

  Continue on to Noar Hill Hanger where you can still see the evidence of prehistoric field systems . 

  In the area too is the Noar Hill nature reserve , on land where chalk was once dug . 

  Approaching Selborne -- the mid-point of the walk -- from the south , the path follows the line of medieval strip lynches -- hedgerows still growing where one field level drops to another . 

  To the north of Selborne the path goes past damp hollows which were once medieval fish ponds . 

  The path goes on to pass through Binswood , once a deer park but now a Site of Special Scientific Interest . 

  The route follows the B3004 for a while to East Worldham , turning right along a minor road and bearing left to head up through Monk Wood and on to Alton where it ends at the railway station . 

  DOONE VALLEY AND EAST LYN RIVER 

  This walk not only takes in the lovely moorland around the Doone Valley it also runs along the shady woodland paths on the banks of the East Lyn river . 

  The walk is linear so you shall need a friendly car driver to make it that little bit easier . 

  From the County Gate car park on the A39 to the east of Lynmouth walk south , along the path signed to Malmsmede and Oare . 

  Cross Oare Water , go onto the farm track and then by road to Malmsmede . 

  Nearby is what is reputed to have been the Lorna Doone farm from the novel by RD Blackmore . 

  Turn left at the junction in the village . 

  After around 900 yards , where the road bends take the track on the left signed to Doone Valley . 

  Keeping parallel to Bagworthy Water , continue south , past the memorial to RD Blackmore to the site of the medieval village . 

  Take the wide path to the right signed Brandon Common and go north-west across the moor to the gate . 

  Carry on to Lankcombe Ford . 

  Continue north to the road junction east of Tippacott and walk into the village , bearing right with the road . 

  Leave the road at the path on the right around 900 yards past the cattle grid and carry on to Alderford and then head west to Rockford . 

  Cross the East Lyn River at Rockford and follow the east bank of the river to Watersmeet . 

  At Watersmeet itself the East Lyn meets up with Combe Park Water and here you shall find a National Trust shop , a cafe and toilets . 

  From Watersmeet take the path signed Hillsford Bridge and head south on the east of the river . 

  At Hillsford Bridge cross the bridge and take the main Lynton road uphill and as the road bends sharply take the path to the right heading north . 

  Where the path divides , keep right on the lower path . 

  This veers west , taking you to Oxen Tor from where the path zig zags into woods above Lynmouth . 

  Follow a wall to a gate , turn right and at the bottom head west to the road . 

  Recommended by HF Holidays who use the above route on walking holidays at their house at Selworthy . 

  For details contact HF on 

  Local transport timetables are also available from the tourist board . 

  WORSLEY TRAIL 

  The Worsley Trail running from Brighstone Forest to the holiday town of Shanklin is a great way of getting to see the interior of the Isle of Wight . 

  The Trail starts at the south-east of Brighstone Forest where it meets another long distance route -- the Tennyson Trail . 

  Follow the bridleway signed Shorwell and continue east with Brighstone Forest on the left along the top of Limerstone Down . 

  Cross the main road and follow the bridleway signed Chillerton towards Londen Copse . 

  Cross a field and take the track towards New Barn Farm before heading down the footpath on the left signed Chillerton . 

  Continue with the TV transmitter on the left until you meet the main road . 

  Turn right and follow the road for around 600 yards turning left where the road forks . 

  Follow the minor road to Ramsdown Farm . 

  At the road junction turn right to Roslin Farm and walk between the farm buildings . 

  Make your way to Cridmore Farm keeping it on your right . 

  Continue along footpaths to cross River Medina by the footbridge . 

  Go into the field , bearing right with the hedge on the left . 

  Go east , south-east and east again to reach path junction . 

  Head south and turn left at the point where you see a track on the right to North Appleford . 

  Turn left again then go right on the path to Bleakdown . 

  When you meet the road turn right and follow it for JJ mile and turn left through a gate . 

  Follow the sign for Godshill heading towards Lavender's Farm . 

  Go past the entrance to Lavender's Farm , turn right along the track past the farm itself . 

  Follow the path , crossing a river on a footbridge in the grounds of a ruined mill . 

  Skirt the garden of " Bridgecourt " . 

  Follow the minor road leading south from Godshill and turn left on the path signed Sainham and Wroxhall . 

  Sainham Farm itself should be on your left . 

  Continue on the track signed Gat Cliff and Stenbury Down . 

  Carry on , bearing south-west to reach the top of Gat Cliff where you will find the Worsley Monument . 

  Walk through the Freemantle Copse , take the left fork of the bridleway and cross three fields to reach the drive of Appuldurcome House . 

  Turn left along Appledurcombe Road to reach the main road , cross it and go up the steps to the disused railway track . 

  Turn right , joining the road at the bridge . 

  Turn left along Castle Road , following a path to the right signed The Downs , Shanklin and Ventnor . 

  Follow the path to Cook's Castle and through a wooded area . 

  Continue east following the signs for Shanklin to the Shanklin Old Parish Church of St Blasius . 

  Turn left to Shanklin Old Village . 

  BRECON BEACONS CIRCUIT 

  This route takes in all the major summits on the main ridge of the Brecon Beacons . 

  From the car park below the Neuadd Reservoir walk towards the reservoir to the end of the road . 

  Go through the reservoir gates , down left across a gully and up again to follow the path across the dam . 

  Get onto the moorland by a stile on the far side and aim towards the right hand edge of the forest about 100 yards away across the valley . 

  Walk uphill , where the forest ends cross a stream and continue uphill with a stream gully to your left . 

  At the top of the gully turn right and follow a path along the edge of a steep grassy slope on the right . 

  The path leads across several small streams down the steep slope to the right . 

  After JJ mile the slope becomes a cliff . 

  Walk beside it until you reach Bwlch Duwynt . 

  From here work your way up the rocks to the summit of Corn Du and go to the steep northern edge of the mountain . 

  From the cairn turn right along a track which leads east-north-east to the summit . 

  Turn right , with a steep drop on the left where the path descends towards the Upper Neuadd reservoir . 

  As the gradient eases , follow the steep edge to the left . 

  The descent ends in a marshy col , and from here it is JJ mile to the summit cairn of Cribyn . 

  Turn right and follow a broad track for JJ mile down to the Gap . 

  Turn right and walk down the track . 

  After 1 miles a stream cuts a gully across the track . 

  Cross it and climb up the opposite side to join the road to the car park . 

  CAERBWDY TO SOLVA 

  For much of its route this circular walk uses the spectacular Pembrokeshire Coast Path with wonderful views of the cliffs , returning to the start point on country paths and minor roads . 

  From the car park turn right and head south . 

  Where the road bears left continue straight on to pick up the coast path above Caerbwdy Bay -- look out for the purple sandstone around the bay . 

  Continue east along the coast path . 

  The path is famous for its wild plants -- thrift , sea campion , kidney vetch , thyme and stonecrop are some you may see . 

  And look out for the chough -- a rare member of the crow family -- which feeds on the clifftop vegetation . 

  As you continue you will cross Morfa Common , an area of cliff-top heathland , now managed by the National Trust to encourage wildlife . 

  Down below is Porth-y-Rhaw Bay , once the site of a woollen mill and a lime kiln . 

  Further on at Aberllong bay you can see the remains of three tugs wrecked in 1986 on a journey from Liverpool . 

  And the cave Ogof Tobacco bears witness to the area's smuggling past . 

  Continue on to Solva Harbour where you can still see eight of the original 12 lime kilns built there . 

  From Solva the route cuts back across country to Llanunwas Farm . 

  The surrounding area is damp and so favoured by colourful plants such as the Marsh Marigold , Ragged Robin and Yellow Flag Iris . 

  Continue on to the Nine Wells valley then head south west to cross Morfa Common again . 

  Then the route goes north to follow the road going to the west before heading north back to the car park . 

  THE MAWDDACH ESTUARY 

  This walk is a real treat for anyone interested in birds . 

  The Mawddach Estuary has a rich variety of wetland and woodland habitats attracting a wide range of different species . 

  An RSPB woodland trail is just near the start of the walk and towards the end you shall come across an RSPB observatory in the old signal box near Penmaenpool . 

  And the estuary is beautiful , with mountain ranges rising on each side . 

  To the south is the great bulk of Cadair Idris . 

  To the north are Llethyr and Diffwys . 

  If you look east , in the distance you shall see the peaks of Aran Benllen and Aran Fawddwy . 

  The walk starts in the town of Barmouth and finishes , 10 miles later in Dolgellau . 

  Route finding is simple -- for almost all the way you simply follow the old railway line running north-east from Morfa Mawddach station . 

  From Barmouth head south , crossing the bridge over to Morfa Mawddach station . 

  Around 300 yards past the car park and toilet area you pass through a wide kissing gate to get on to the old railway track . 

  For a short section of the trail here , the Snowdonia National Park authority has provided facilities for disabled people -- a shale surface to make access for wheelchairs easier and a handrail . 

  And just past Morfa Mawddach station an RSPB woodland trail leads off to the right . 

  You cross a series of bridges and get into the swampy meadowland known as Arthog Bog . 

  It's been made a Site of Special Scientific Interest because of its strength as a habitat for a wide range of grasses and rare plants . 

  Scrubland birds such as reed bunting and curlew breed here . 

  A crossroads in the trail marks the site of the old Arthog Railway station and to the right you can see the village of Arthog . 

  After this , the path follows the southern edge of the estuary . 

  For most of the time the estuary is a huge sand spit here which make an ideal feeding ground for estuary birds -- look out for oystercatchers and herons . 

  Oak woodland covers the next stretch of hillside on the right and leads on to the Forestry Commission conifer forest . 

  Carry on to get views of the village of Bontddu on the opposite bank . 

  Continue onwards until you reach a kissing gate leading into the old Penmaenpool station yard . 

  From here the track crosses an important wetland area where you shall find the Penmaenpool Reedbed . 

  It's one of the largest areas of common reed in Wales and an important breeding area for otters and wetland birds . 

  The route continues across the A493 , going on to follow the banks of the Afon Wnion into Dolgellau . 

  OUTDOOR PEOPLE 

  OUTDOOR SCULPTOR 

  Outdoor Sculptor Sally Matthews uses natural materials such as hedge clippings , roots and cow muck to make life-like models of animals in the countryside 

  It's probably because of Grizedale Forest in the Lake District that I manage to make a living as a sculptor . 

  The life-size herd of wild boar I made for it out of cement , roots , mud and loose rubbish such as broken rock and hedge clippings , launched my career five years ago . 

  I'd already been to the forest couple of times as a student and thought it was the most wonderful place . 

  Grizedale gave me a real opportunity to put my work outdoors . 

  The boar are now deteriorating . 

  I never say my work is going to last a long time -- usually five to ten years , though obviously the smaller pieces which are kept inside last as long as people look after them . 

  With a public sculpture , I shall pop back and maybe fiddle around with it as it weathers . 

  The materials themselves are really quite important to my work . 

  I try to use ones which I think are appropriate for the shape and exterior of the animal . 

  But my main priority is making the animals look real with a lot of life in them , rather than the staid and stiff specimens cast in bronze , sitting on top of a television or placed in a town square . 

  Made from natural materials , they can be much more alive . 

  When you're working on a specific site , the lie of the land can really animate the sculpture . 

  Recently I've made three dogs out of wood and cement , chasing a deer up a slope in Grizedale . 

  They always encouraged varied materials where I studied at art college in Loughborough . 

  And when you're a student you use what is cheap and available . 

  That's why I started using mud and clay . 

  I did two rabbit sculptures for an exhibition in Yorkshire made of cow much on a metal frame . 

  Some of the visitors told their children they were made out of mud rather than say they were made from " cow muck " . 

  I started using cow much when I did not have any plaster or cement . 

  It's easily manipulated and it dries hard . 

  I always think of it being quite clean because cows only eat grass . 

  Now I've started using coconut fibre which is a peat substitute . 

  I mix it with glue -- it's a bit like papier mach . 

  Scrap metal is also quite good but I am a bit of a cheat . 

  The metal I pick up usually has some shape to it . 

  I learned the basics of welding at college and have picked up tips from the experts while working on my scrap metal cows at Beamish Tram Shed and a pipe factory in Hebburn on Tyneside . 

  The cows have gone to the cycle path on the former Consett to Sunderland railway line . 

  The sculptures make the flat railway tracks more interesting for walkers and cyclists . 

  It's quite funny when you see people cycling past them . 

  They either wobble around on their bikes or screech to a sudden halt . 

  I did not set out to be a sculptor but discovered at college it was much more of a natural thing for me . 

  I can draw but I am not particularly good at painting . 

  I want to stick to making sculptures of animals because of a love of them . 

  My dad was a vet and we've always had animals about us . 

  They are just an endless source of inspiration and excitement . 

  When I need a " top-up " , I go back to my parents' farm near the Brecon Beacons in Wales for lambing . 

  As I was brought up on a farm I am used to working with my hands and in all weathers . 

  At the beginning of the winter I always feel a bit reluctant about working outside until I get my long johns on . 

  Then I acclimatise myself and just get on with things . 

  My latest project is making seven goats for the riverside walk at Gateshead . 

  I am making them at Bill Quay Community Farm nearby rather than in my studio . 

  Because it's going to be a public sculpture I think it's nice that people can come and see it being made . " 

  Animals are an endless source of inspiration for sculptor Sally Matthews 

  Subscription Offer 

  FREE BOOK 

  From the tops of the Three Peaks to the rich green valley bottoms and the rushing rivers and waterfalls , the Yorkshire Dales is one of our most cherished walking areas . 

  And it's much loved by Mike Harding , entertainer and well-known walker , who has made the Dales his home for the past twenty years . 

  And during this time he must have trodden pretty much every footpath there . 

  Harding pays tribute to the area in his lovely book Walking the Dales where he describes many of his favourite walks , some popular , some far away from the main routes . 

  The books is more than merely route descriptions though , as Harding recounts the times over the years he's walked the various paths , adding anecdotes , descriptions of the people and insights into the history of the area . 

  It's all enriched with the wonderful photographs taken by the author himself . 

  It's such a great book we decided to give away a copy to every new subscriber to Outdoor Action . 

  With Mike Harding's book -- 11.99 in the shops but absolutely free to all new subscribers -- and a year's worth of Outdoor Action , you shall be guaranteed plenty of ideas for new places to walk -- and you shall get a good read each month as your issue of Outdoor Action is posted through your door . 

  The offer is only open while stocks last so post off the order form today . 

  If you do not want to cut into the magazine a photocopy will be fine . 

  Here's wishing you a great New Year of walking ! 

  WHAT'S ON 

  NOVEMBER 

  WEATHER WATCH 

  Standard British November weather is rainy and chilly . 

  Eastern Scotland and England are coolest -- the influence of the colder continent to the east . 

  The Atlantic side of Britain is milder . 

  As autumn slides into winter across Europe , weather-wise walkers look further south-east and south-west . 

  Island addicts find warm coastlines and brisk mountain days in Crete and Cyprus , with just an occasional wet day . 

  West Mediterranean islands have cooled off and can have rainy days , but walking is still pleasant . 

  Southern Portugal , south and east Spain stay sunny , warm and dry . 

  Eastern Europe chills down and while it's often dry , snow starts taking over from rain . 

  The Alpine heartland is cold but still has more dry days than wet . 

  Snow is on the peaks and blocks some passes . 

  Highs and lows 

  Mid-November can suffer a few foggy days . 

  1948 was ridiculous with 114 continuous hours of fog shrouding coal-burning London . 

  Two years earlier , Britain's warmest November day had been recorded in Clwyd at 21.7C/ 71F . 

  South-east England had snow in November 1980 . 

  Britain's most destructive storm swept southern England in November 1703 . 

  It killed 8,000 people , wrecked hundreds of ships , destroyed Eddystone lighthouse , 400 windmills and 800 houses . 

  Wireless pioneers heard the BBC's first weather forecast in November 1922 . 

  Early viewers studied the first TV weather-chart in November 1936 . 

  WELCOME 

  November is the kind of month that we year-round walkers cherish . 

  The fair-weather hikers have hung up their boots and retreated indoors and the rest of us have even more of the countryside to ourselves . 

  Solitude adds a special quality to a walk and bad weather can do the same -- though it does mean that many of us prefer to stay in the lowlands more often . 

  Starting on page 6 we've got lots of suggestions of great lowland areas to explore -- places you may overlook in the height of summer when you're busy heading for the hills or tackling treks abroad . 

  Chilly weather does mean that we have to pay more attention to our walking clothes . 

  With this in mind we take a look at the kind of thing the cold weather walker should be wearing on page 26 and bring you the latest thermals on page 24 . 

  Enjoy your Outdoor Action ! 

  EVENTS 

  1 Opening of the new Archaeological Way , Derbyshire . 

  Five mile ramble led by John Merrill starting at Meden Trail car park , Pleasley . 2-5.30pm then tea and bus back to car park . . 

  1 Woodland walks in Rossendale looking for insects and fungi with Lancashire Wildlife Trust . 

  1 Guided six hour walk around the foothills of the Old Man of Coniston . 

  4 Gentle guided walk starting at 10.30 . 

  8 Guided 3.5 hour moorland and valley walk starting at Robbers Bridge , over Chalk and Weir Waters . 

  15 Help clear scrub to allow orchids to grow . 

  26 Glasgow launch of National Tree Week . 

  1,000 trees to be planted on the banks of the Clyde . 

  29 Conservation project at Whaley Thorns Heritage Centre , Nottinghamshire , to rescue hawthorn trees from a meadow . 

  Spades and instruction provided . 

  29 Chilterns Project walk across the Amersham Estate to look at tree and woodland conservation . 

  Enjoy woodland walks on November 1 

  LOWLAND WALKING 

  Ups on the Downs 

  Do not let Michael Fish's gloomy forecasts get you down . 

  Catherine Moore discovers you can get a big kick from staying low when the weather clouds the tops 

  The value of occasionally going AWOL cannot be over-stressed . 

  Especially at this time of year when all too often the weather is as miserable as a dozen Mancunian pensioners waiting for the 211 to Gorton . 

  Getting away for the weekend , or even for a day of walking , is the ideal cure for those post-summer-oh-my-God-how-can-I-afford-Christmas blues . 

  And if the weather is dog rough a mountain walk can seem less than appealing . 

  But that's no excuse to sit on your backside cursing Michael Fish . 

  There are plenty of lowland walks which are less exposed to enjoy around Britain . 

  And even if the weather is passable , low level walks will take you to places you'd perhaps never have tried if you're one of the many walkers whose sights are normally set pretty firmly on the heights . 

  SOMETHING TO GET YOUR TEETH INTO 

  If you're looking for a challenge there are plenty of lowland long distance routes to choose from -- just the thing to liven up your autumn . 

  The Peddars Way and Norfolk Coast Path are combined to make a National Trail , taking you through one of the best-known lowland areas of Britain . 

  The 93 mile route starts at Knettishall Heath near Thetford in Norfolk . 

  The first section is along the Peddars Way which follows the approximate line of a Roman road . 

  It follows paths , bridleways and some quiet roads and crosses heathlands , woods and agricultural land . 

  The ruins of Castle Acre's Cluniac priory area one of the highlights of this section . 

  The Peddars Way reaches the coast near to Holme next the Sea at the River Hun . 

  From here it makes its way down the coast -- an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty -- to the holiday resort of Cromer . 

  Another lowland National Trail that's worth a try at this time of year is the Wolds Way , stretching for 79 miles from Hessle Haven just west of Hull to Filey Brig in North Yorkshire . 

  It goes west along the river Humber before passing north around the western edge of the Yorkshire Wolds . 

  The route then heads north to the medieval village of Wharram Percy before cutting east towards the coast at Filey Brigg . 

  Just the other side of the Humber estuary another long distance path heads through the flat lands of the Lincolnshire Wolds . 

  From the Humber Bridge at Barton on Humber , the Viking Way goes east to cross the Wolds and follows the Bain valley to Horncastle . 

  Then it follows a former railway line to Woodhall Spa before crossing fenland on its way to the cathedral city of Lincoln . 

  From here it follows the route of the prehistoric Sewstern Lane and drops down to the Grantham Canal . 

  The 140 mile long route eventually finishes in Oakham , Leicestershire after passing Rutland Water . 

  WATERY WALKS 

  Canal walks are another choice for good quality lowland walks . 

  The Kennet and Avon Canal , running from Bristol to the Thames at Reading , provides not only a fine 87 mile walk , but there are endless possibilities for circular walks along its length . 

  The Cheshire Ring Canal Walk is another popular choice . 

  This 97 mile circular route follows the towpaths of six different canals . 

  The walk passes through towns as well as countryside and gives good views over to the Cheshire Plain and the Peak District . 

  As it's circular there's a choice of start points including the main towns on the route -- . 

  In Scotland you can try the 29 mile walk along the Forth and Clyde Canal from Bowling to Falkirk . 

  WILDLIFE TREATS 

  Dig out your binoculars for lowland walks which can turn out to be wildlife treats because at this time of year the estuaries and low-lying areas around our coast are teeming with birdlife . 

  When their breeding season is over , and before the harsh winters of the far north set in , thousands upon thousands of birds fly south . 

  This makes Britain in autumn a very special place as a staging post for birds flying further south to the Mediterranean and Africa and as a winter home for many others . 

  Left : Castle Acre Priory on the Peddars Way . 

  Main pic : Glastonbury Tor on the Somerset Levels . 

  Both photos by John Cleare . 

  Above : the RSPB reserve at Leighton Moss . 

  Photo by the RSPB 

  Morecambe Bay has especially rich pickings . 

  It's a huge area expending from Lancashire into Cumbria , with around 120 square miles of mud and sand at low tide . 

  The size and quality of the environment make it an internationally important site for birds . 

  As many as 80,000 knot spend their winters here -- that's around a quarter of the total population wintering in Britain . 

  And oystercatcher and dunlin can number as many as 40,000 . 

  Ringed plover and sanderling pass through in great numbers on their way further south . 

  And in winter lots of seaducks and diving birds use the bay . 

  When the tide turns , the birds are forced off the sandbanks and gather on the saltmarshes . 

  Take a walk out from Morecambe , and head north to Hest Bank for the best place to see the birds . 

  The RSPB reserve at Leighton Moss , just north of Morecambe by Silverdale , is also well worth exploring if you're in the area . 

  Leighton Moss has one of the largest reed beds in the country . 

  Autumn migrations bring garganey , marsh harrier and black tern . 

  Waders include greenshank , green sandpiper and spotted redshank . 

  Wildfowl are numerous in winter with thousands of teal as well as wigeon , pintail and shoveler . 

  The well-known RSPB reserve at Minsmere in Suffolk is another good venue for autumn bird walks . 

  There are a variety of paths around the reserve as well as local bridleways and footpaths you can link up with to make a longer walk . 

  The reserve takes in part of the Minsmere levels which were flooded during the Second World War to counter possible invasion . 

  Since then the area has become overgrown with reeds and provides an important habitat for bird life . 

  As well as this area , the reserve encompasses woods , heath and beach . 

  Many different species can be found at Minsmere . 

  Large numbers of waders pass through in the autumn including curlew , sandpiper and ruff . 

  In winter the deliberate flooding of an area of the reserve known as The Scrape encouraged hundreds of wigeon , teal and mallard . 

  You might also see gadwall , Brent geese and Bewick's swans . 

  In Northern Ireland , Lough Foyle in Derry is well known for the thousands of wintering wildfowl it attracts . 

  The RSPB reserve here takes in the south-east foreshore from Longfield Point , almost down to the Roe estuary . 

  There's also a National Nature Reserve at the mouth of the River Roe . 

  Access is good at Longfield Point , Faughanvale and Ballykelly . 

  You will see many wigeon , mallard , teal and dunlin there among many other species . 

  And as many as 2,500 whopper swans feed on the farmland adjacent to the lough . 

  In Wales walkers can try routes around the Dyfi estuary where you shall find the Ynis-hir bird reserve west of the A487 between Machynlleth and Aberystwyth near Furnace . 

  A variety of birds use this as a stopover on their autumn migration routes and white-fronted geese , wigeon and a selection of waders winter here . 

  Winter walkers in Scotland should pay a visit to the Loch of Strathbeg , by the sea 30 miles north of Aberdeen off the A952 at Crimond . 

  Nearly 40,000 geese spend their winters here . 

  FOGGY DAYS 

  November often brings the odd day of mist and when the conditions are foggy , I often cannot see the point in a tough hill walk when the expansive views of other months are nowhere to be seen . 

  And while the memory of stumbling through a huge -- and previously unseen -- boggy area on the North York moors in search of a mischievous mutt saves me from getting too romantic about foggy days , they are not a write off . 

  I prefer to stick to lower levels and there are some walks I've enjoyed more when the mist is down and the countryside has taken on a more sinister or unreal appearance . 

  Spooky , spooky ! 

  When the mist comes down many areas like the Somerset Levels take on a sinister and unreal appearance 

  Dartmoor takes some beating . 

  It's not really lowland in south of England terms , but the area cannot be called mountainous . 

  Dartmoor's a shadow of its real self in the sunshine -- to appreciate the place fully you need a healthy covering of mist . 

  Tors take on the appearance of ruined castles or huge animals through the hanging cloud while stunted trees add to the other-worldly landscape . 

  Include a visit to Hound Tor with the fantastic rocky shapes said to be dogs converted to stone by witches . 

  And nearby are the remains of a deserted medieval village . 

  Spooky or what ? 

  On the boring but practical side -- do not get too carried away wandering through the Dartmoor mist -- it's all too easy to get lost so do not try it unless you're competent with a map and compass . 

  The Somerset Levels is a weird and wonderful place at the best of times , a strange flat landscape with the unnatural looking mound of Glastonbury Tor rising up from nowhere . 

  It's brilliant under mist . 

  Aspirant hippies will find that Glastonbury makes a good base to take day walks from ( after having stocked up on crystals ) . 

  Start an afternoon's walk from the town centre and head south to the River Brue and Kennard Moor . 

  Circle round to approach the town from the east and climb the Tor on your way back to base . 

  Non-hippies may prefer to take the cathedral town of Wells as a base . 

  Heading out to sea again , Pembrokeshire beaches are great places to walk when the mist is down and all the sun-worshippers are safely tucked away at home . 

  Pendine Sands , stretching east from the village of Pendine , is six miles long and wonderful to walk along on a misty day -- part of the sands are controlled by the Ministry of Defence though and access is restricted . 

  And further west , using the coast path as a base , you can work out loads of circular walks taking in beaches . 

  One such walk takes you from the village of Bosherston , down to the sands at Broad Haven and around to St Govan's Head , where there's a tiny chapel tucked into the cliff face which you get to down some steps . 

  During a hot summer's day you would not be able to move for frazzled tourists but when the weather is miserable it's a different story . 

  If you're looking for a great highlight to a misty walk , incorporate a visit to a good ruin . 

  Tintern Abbey in the Wye Valley makes a good halfway point on a circular walk from Chepstow . 

  From Chepstow you follow the Wye Valley . 

  Walk north to Tintern where you shall see the impressive ruins of the Cistercian Abbey , built in 1131 and destroyed by Henry VIII in 1536 during the dissolution of the monasteries . 

  From here you cross the river and follow the Offa's Dyke path then the road back to Chepstow . 

  Also good for adding interest to a walk on a misty day are the ruins of Rievaulx and Bolton Abbeys , both in Yorkshire . 

  To see Rievaulx on a decent route , make a circular walk based on the village of Old Byland . 

  You can go north then east over the River Rye and then south to the abbey . 

  Go west on part of The Cleveland Way before making your way back to the village . 

  For Bolton Abbey ( open all year from dawn to dusk ) , start at the Abbey car park , go north to Simon's Seat then walk over to Howgill and return on the banks of the River Wharfe . 

  Save the abbey as a treat for the end of your walk . 

  FACT FILE 

  For further information about the areas covered contact the relevant tourist boards or national park authorities . 

  Many of them produce walk leaflets and give information about a wide range of accommodation in their areas . 

  Contact British Waterways : for more details about canal walking : and the RSPB for further information about the bird reserves featured in this article : . 

  GEAR TEST 

  40-50 litre RUCKSACKS 

  Paul Traynor heads for the hills with seven mid-sized rucksacks , ideal for long hostel-based routes or shorter backpacking trips . 

  Here's how they fared 

  There are times , especially in winter , when the average daysack just cannot handle all you want to shove into it . 

  There are other times when for short trips you just do not need all the capacity and weight of a " serious " backpacking sack . 

  The rucksacks we're looking at here -- 40-50 litres -- cater for this sort of cross-over demand . 

  If you're thinking of tackling a long distance footpath staying at youth hostels and guest houses , then this size sack is ideal as your load is mainly bulky spare clothing rather than weighty hardware . 

  If you plan lightweight backpacking overnight trips or weekend walks , then this size of sack can be suitable -- especially if the tent , cooking gear and so on are spread between two or three people . 

  But for this kind of use think about the design of your pack and whether or not you want it to have a frame . 

  The pack's got to be comfortable when it's fully loaded . 

  You will not necessarily need a sophisticated carrying system with full hip belt , but you shall have to be careful to limit your load to avoid crippled neck and shoulders ! 

  Remember that simple waist belts are there mainly to stop the sack swaying around . 

  However you intend to use the sack , it's worth trying on a few makes before buying . 

  Two rucksacks which look very similar in size and design may well feel quite different on your back . 

  People come in all shapes and sizes and rucksack makers often have to aim for the middle ground when deciding on specifications . 

  Even sacks with adjustable back lengths have their limits and people of above or below average height will have to shop around a little more carefully before finding the pack that's just right for them . 

  Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist who has been walking and backpacking at home and abroad for over 25 years 

  VANGO ODYSSEY 45 

  Pockets : 

  single compartment main sack with drawstring top ; lid pocket with rear zip ; side pockets ( 9in deep ) . 

  Carrying system : 

  soft padded back ( with extra lumbar padding ) , has no frame and the shoulder harness is sewn in . 

  Waist belt is attached to the pack by padded wings . 

  Straps/ attachment points : 

  ice axe loop and snap . 

  Paul's verdict : 

  very light on the pocket as well on the scales , the Odyssey is nevertheless well made and strongly put together . 

  Bearing price and weight in mind small points like the extra padding on the back and waist belt wings are noteworthy -- giving extra comfort when the sack is full . 

  Good value for money . 

  LOWE WALKABOUT 45 

  Intended use : 

  daysack large enough to hold climbing gear which can also be used for lightweight weekend walking/ backpacking . 

  Pockets : 

  single compartment with drawstring ; deep lid pocket with rear zip ; deep pocket on sack front with semi-circular zip . 

  Carrying system : 

  the sack has a soft padded back with no frame . 

  The carrying system is fixed length , with the padded shoulder harnesses sewn in . 

  The waist belt , attached to short wings at the base of the sack , is not padded . 

  Elasticated chest strap . 

  Straps/ attachment points : 

  two ice axe loops with top straps which may be adjusted to varying heights ; two compression straps at each side ; d-ring positioned on each shoulder harness strap . 

  Fabrics : 

  TXN 600 texturised nylon designed to be both light and hard wearing . 

  Paul's verdict : 

  I found the sack very comfortable considering the simplicity of the back system and was pleased to find that it was long enough for me to use the waist belt properly . 

  The quality of components and manufacture was also high . 

  The compression straps allow gear to be arranged using the full height of the sack and strapped in tightly -- a plus for climbers and scramblers . 

  I also liked the pocket at the front of the sack -- it's big enough for hat and gloves , knick-knacks , food etc and easy for a companion to get at without you having to take the pack off . 

  RISOL SURVIVOR T9 45 

  Pockets : 

  single compartment main body with drawstring plus balance/ extension ; lid pocket with rear zip ; side pockets ( 11in deep ) with semi-circular zips . 

  Carrying system : 

  soft padded back with no frame ; sewn-in , well-padded shoulder harness with tension adjustment straps ; simple sewn in padded hip belt with lumbar pad and side tension straps . 

  Elasticated chest strap . 

  Straps/ attachment points : 

  two lashing patches on lid ; no ice axe loop . 

  Paul's verdict : 

  I was impressed by the specification of the this sack -- especially considering the modest price . 

  Quite apart from the good design points like the valance/ sack extension , there are even little refinements like tug-loops tied on to the zips . 

  In use I found the sack comfortable and stable to carry with the back just long enough for me to use the hip belt , which was functional , if a little basic . 

  One niggle was that the ends of the shoulder harness adjustment straps were unfinished -- if you were not careful the strap ran right through the buckle . 

  Correcting this at home takes a minute or two with needle and thread -- but I did not have a sewing kit with me on my first outing . 

  Otherwise no complaints about the finish of a strongly-made product . 

  BERGHAUS DART 45 

  Intended use : 

  simple , very hard-wearing hillwalking daysack . 

  Pockets : 

  single compartment main body with drawstring top ; lid pocket with rear zip and pleated top which expands for extra capacity ; 12in deep side pockets with semi-circular zips -- one also has a small zipped external pouch for keys and bits and bobs ; large pocket at front of sack with wrap-around zip . 

  Carrying system : 

  the padded back has an internal inverted V frame which is easily removable . 

  The back length of the pack is fixed with sewn in shoulder straps . 

  Simple , unpadded waist belt . 

  Straps/ attachment points : 

  single ice axe loop and strap . 

  Fabrics : 

  Ardura 1000D nylon . 

  Advent fabric on back -- designed to be fast drying . 

  Paul's verdict : 

  tough and well made , this sack has some nice touches allied to a basically simple design . 

  Features like the key pouch on the side pocket and the expanding lid are practical , not gimmicky . 

  I also found the cut of the shoulder harness particularly comfortable -- important when there's no hip belt to take the strain . 

  The internal frame no doubt helped there . 

  A solid choice , but at a price . 

  VAUDE FORMULA 

  Intended use : 

  touring and trekking rucksack ideal for weekend backpacking . 

  Pockets : 

  two compartment main body with zipped dividing panel and drawstring valance top -- access to lowest compartment is by semi-circular zip ; large lid pocket with rear zip . 

  Carrying system : 

  the sack uses the company's Tergoflex-Light system which allows you to fine-tune the hip belt and shoulder harness position . 

  This sophisticated-looking arrangement actually proved very simple to adjust -- you just loosen the recessed screws with a coin and move the belt and harness up or down the base plat to the position you want , then retighten the screws . 

  The length of the adjusted pack was enough to cater for my unusually long back and after making a small adjustment to the shoulder strap attachment plates which can be swivelled to close or widen the gap between them at the neck , I had a very good fit . 

  Good padding -- with ventilation channels -- means the plates and screws are safely recessed . 

  Straps/ attachment points : 

  two compression straps on each side of the pack ; ice axe loop and strap ; six attachment buckles on the lid ; D-ring positioned on each shoulder strap ; elasticated chest strap . 

  Fabrics : 

  12oz Cordura nylon with doubled base . 

  " Quick drying " fabric on back . 

  Paul's verdict : 

  I certainly found the sack to be an extremely comfortable and stable load carrier . 

  The carrying system worked well for me and being broad-shouldered and thick-necked I particularly appreciated being able to properly and permanently adjust the width between the shoulder straps . 

  The hip belt too was impressively firm and comfortable . 

  The rest of the sack matched up to the quality of manufacture and finish of the back system -- as it should do at the price . 

  One point worth mentioning is that the carrying system may be completely detached from the sack and used with other sacks in the range which are available separately without the back system . 

  KARRIMOR TRAIL 40 

  Intended use : 

  rambling and hillwalking sack for day/ weekend use . 

  Pockets : 

  single compartment main body with drawstring ; lid pocket with rear zip ; 10in deep side pockets ; mesh pouch on front . 

  Carrying system : 

  the pack uses the KST " size tolerant " system -- although shoulder straps are actually sewn in place , their low take-off point on the back of the sack allows you to adjust the fit precisely , fine tuning with the top tension straps . 

  I needed all the possible length to be able to wear the fixed-position hip belt correctly . 

  A good fit is important to get the most benefit from the parallel aluminium bars which frame the back system -- these can be bent to suit individuals . 

  Paul's verdict : 

  this proved to be a pretty good compromise sack for mixed daywalking and light load carrying -- the back system and simple frame helping out when needed without adding too much to the weight the rest of the time . 

  Stable and comfortable on the back , it's well made and functional . 

  RAFTING IN TURKEY 

  Splash down 

  River rafting is definitely the thing to try if you have the spirit of adventure coursing through your veins . 

  And it's spills and thrills all the way for Henry Druce as he runs the rapids of the River Coruh in Eastern Turkey 

  PICTURE IT . 

  Hundreds of people line the banks of the River Coruh in Eastern Turkey eagerly awaiting three huge river rafts , each with a 24 strong crew , to set off down the rapids . 

  It seems like it's the equivalent of the FA Cup Final in this rural regional , far beyond the usual tourist trail . 

  The rafters include journalists from around the world , two guides per boat , and the Turkish Minister of Tourism -- a man with a mission to promote the sport and attract visitors . 

  Turkish camera crews , photographers and journalists are out in force to capture the moment . 

  The guide gives us some brief paddling instructions and then we're off , hurtling furiously downstream . 

  I concentrate on paddling in time with everyone else but my efforts are to no avail . 

  Within twenty seconds of leaving the safety of the shore , the front of the raft is sucked into the raging froth then hurled skyward , flinging us all into the river . 

  Seconds later the two rafts following behind hit the same spot and the Minister is taking his chances in the river along with everyone else . 

  Some manage to catch hold of their raft while others are swept uncontrollably downstream . 

  This is one hell of a river -- it sucks me under then spits me out as I hurtle downstream . 

  I gasp for air when I can but never enough . 

  This is not good . 

  But in my panic stricken state I still remember the advice to face forwards with feet stretched out in front to fend off the rocks , kicking myself off as they come rapidly one after the other . 

  Eventually as the rapids calm down I am swept to the river bank , exhausted , shaking , but mercifully only a little battered . 

  Without my helmet and life jacket it could have been a very different story . 

  Some were not so lucky . 

  Three of the rafters were washed up unconscious on the river bank . 

  And one woman made a dramatic exit from the scene in a rickety old ambulance which sped her along winding dusty roads to the local hospital . 

  She spent two days recovering . 

  The rest of us were taken at a more sedate pace for a check-up at the hospital . 

  A near tragedy was clearly not a good start but this was not your run-of-the-mill trip . 

  There had been pressure from the Tourist Board and Turkish TV crews to start the rafting trip from a particularly scenic and dramatic place and the guides misjudged what could be achieved with a novice crew . 

  We were just unlucky . 

  The French expedition guides were determined not to be defeated by the River Coruh , rated as one of the ten best white water rafting rivers in the world , and I was determined to stay in a raft for more than 20 seconds . 

  The eventual plan was to travel 150km along the middle section of the River Coruh which runs from the Mescit Mountains down to the Black Sea . 

  The guides were planning to do the whole stretch and include us novices on the easier sections . 

  My hands were shaking as I got into the raft for the second time . 

  It could have been nerves or the effects of the Turkish firewater raki from the night before . 

  However nerves and hangover were soon forgotten as we headed out into the middle of the river and the adrenaline started pumping . 

  Our guide Sam gave us very clear instructions -- he did not need to emphasise how important it was for us to do exactly as he said . 

  When we hit rapids this time the sensation was surprisingly gentle -- it felt like we were riding on a huge river of jelly . 

  In larger waves it was more of a rollercoaster ride . 

  The front of the raft would rise alarmingly into the air then dip down as the stern followed over the crest of the wave . 

  At times we seemed to be on an unavoidable collision course with menacing sharp edged rocks , only to be swept clear by the current at the last minute . 

  At all times the guide was in total control . 

  As our skill level increased over the days , so did the challenges . 

  We met grade 4 and 5 rapids -- grade 6 is the top grade and considered unrunnable . 

  Some of the rapids were as difficult as those that had been our undoing on the first day , but tackled with a bit of newly learned skill they were challenging and exhilarating rather than terrifying . 

  We saw many examples of the type of water flow which had flipped our rafts over like pancakes . 

  These so called " holes in the water " cause problems because fast flowing water is forced over a rock , plunges down the other side and then tumbles backwards . 

  We took great care to avoid these . 

  Sometimes when the rapids ahead looked particularly fearsome we'd stop and walk along the river bank to see if they were navigable . 

  When they were not , we rafting rookies would leave the boats and watch the guides skilfully manoeuvre their way through the thundering foam . 

  The scenery as we travelled down the river was spectacular . 

  The rugged mountains rose up straight from the river banks and were shaded in greens and browns with gashes of copper where erosion has taken its toll . 

  We passed under rickety wooden bridges and saw solitary castles -- remnants of the Ottoman Empire -- standing like giant ant hills on top of the mountains . 

  The river banks were frequently lined with curious onlookers who struggle to eke out an existence in this harsh environment . 

  We had major novelty value -- it's strange enough for a foreigner to visit the area let alone pose in a raft . 

  When we passed by they would cheer and wave . 

  As we approached Artvin , close to the Georgian border , on the final leg of our journey , the scenery altered dramatically . 

  The river banks changed from jagged rock with little vegetation to luscious green slopes covered with olive trees . 

  There was a humdinger of a reception to greet us . 

  The whole population of the town seemed to be there , along with traditional Turkish dancers and musicians . 

  As I walked to the hotel one of the Turkish rafters rushed towards me with a copy of Turkey's most popular article about the first day of the trip with a picture of my good self and another British journalist , both wrapped in blankets looking forlorn . 

  The caption said " Even the best white water rafters in the world get caught out by the fierce rapids of the River Coruh . " 

  And of course , if it was in the paper it must be true . 

  Main picture : bubble , bubble , toil and trouble on the River Coruh . 

  Bottom left : hit a " hole " in the water badly and the raft can flip . 

  Bottom right : melting snow from the peaks fuels the rapids . 

  Henry Druce went white water rafting in June as a guest of the Turkish Government . 

  Two rafting companies run trips there : 

  DRY SLOPE SKIING 

  SLIDE SHOW 

  Nervous novice or piste perfectionist ? 

  Laura McCaffrey learns that whatever your skill level a dry ski slope is a great practice ground for the real thing 

  Putting your feet into a pair of ski boots for the first time can be alarming . 

  Get the right size , clip them on as tight as possible , stand up and you feel you can hardly walk , let along balance and control a pair of skis . 

  Then you're given the skis which stand as tall as you do and the butterflies can start fluttering . 

  You manage a clumsy robot-like walk in the heavy boots before kicking them into the bindings on the skis and gingerly sliding along . 

  Slowly , you begin to build up confidence , learn to sidestep up the slope and slide cautiously down keeping your skis evenly apart . 

  Then you start to add some flourishes -- push the front tips of the skis almost together , the backs out , bend your knees in slightly and you have a snow plough . 

  Lo and behold you can actually stop when and where you want . 

  Practise sliding and stopping , relax a little and you shall actually begin to enjoy yourself . 

  And when you overcome the fear of falling , because it really does not hurt ( honest ) , your enthusiasm slowly begins to build . 

  Soon you can graduate to using a rope tow to save the considerable effort of sidestepping up the slope , then ski down , stopping in a snow plough at first , then adding simple turns . 

  At last you have the feeling you are actually in control , or at least very nearly . 

  Getting to this stage can take some time . 

  And at 350-500 a week in a ski resort it's an expensive learning curve , not to mention frustrating as a chunk of the week has been eaten up before you've even got going . 

  Graduate to this stage on a dry ski slope for around a fiver per hour before you go on your ski holiday and your money is better spent . 

  There are around 100 dry ski slopes throughout the country , some very short with a gentle gradient , some hundreds of metres long with moguls -- the bumps you meet on the more difficult snow runs -- and slalom courses . 

  They're not just for the beginner but also for people who want to brush up on their skills with or without an instructor . 

  The vast majority hire boots and skis so you do not have to spend a lot of money on gear before you find out if skiing is for you . 

  It's worth mentioning that you're not automatically insured on dry ski slopes so it's worth arranging some personal cover -- accidents are not especially common but you never know . 

  Above : the art of parallel turns and , below , a good long outdoor ski run 

  The slopes themselves are made up of tough diamond shapes of bristles not unlike giant toothbrushes . 

  The bristles work by laying down flat in the direction of travel , so reducing friction between your skis and the surface and allowing the skis to slide . 

  Waxing the skis helps them to slide better and some slopes have a lubrication system which further reduces friction . 

  Most slopes are outside but I went to the 30 metre slope at Calshot Activities Centre at Calshot Spit in the Solent . 

  My downhill skiing was a little rusty to say the least , but a few too many moons ago I'd just about cracked parallel turns , and I felt in need of a brush up . 

  It's important to get good instruction on dry slopes so that you do not get into bad habits before you start on the real stuff . 

  Instructors should be qualified as English Ski Council Artificial Slope Ski Instructors or have qualifications from BASI ( the British Association of Ski Instructors ) . 

  For me the most important skill for the instructor is the ability to demonstrate exactly what you should be doing . 

  My instructor Rhys Henderson , also the Land Sports Head of Department at Calshot , was excellent at this . 

  He took me through the stages a beginner would complete in preparation for a skiing holiday . 

  Before you even begin it's important to get the bindings on your skis -- the attachment which secure your boot firmly when skiing but release it easily if you fall -- adjusted to suit your height and weight . 

  Too tight and the skis will not detach from the boot if you fall and you could really hurt yourself , too loose and they will fall off . 

  Once your kit is sorted out the first hour is generally spent getting used to the skis , sidestepping up the slope and sliding straight down . 

  At this stage it's good to get your balance on the skis by jumping up on both skis together and " stepping " -- lifting first one ski and then the other . 

  After ten minutes we were hot and had to take off a few layers . 

  It's advisable not to have bare arms or legs though , because the matting can burn your skin if you fall . 

  And hard-wearing mittens are essential . 

  We moved quickly on to what is normally the second lesson , snow plough turns , and then the third when thankfully you can use the rope tow . 

  There's an art to getting on and off the thing -- most people fall the first few times . 

  Suffice to say keep your skis parallel or you're a goner . 

  Using the tow you can obviously go higher which gives you much more time skiing downhill to put the theory of turning into practice . 

  And in fact by the end of the one hour lesson I was almost up to something approaching parallel turns . 

  Val d'Isre here I come . 

  EXERCISES 

  Skiing uses muscles other sports do not reach so it's very important to get them into shape before you go . 

  Walking exercises your legs and buttock muscles and builds up stamina , but a few add-on exercises will really pay dividends -- though you might still have trouble standing after the first day on your skis . 

  Thigh stretch 

  Stand on one leg and bring your other knee up to your chest and hold it there for ten seconds . 

  Repeat with the other leg . 

  Full body stretch 

  This can be a killer but it really is good for you . 

  Sit on the floor with one leg outstretched and the other bent at the knee and tucked in close to your thigh . 

  Slowly lean over with both arms to try to touch the toe of your outstretched foot . 

  Do not force it but with repetition it will get easier . 

  Repeat on the other side . 

  Upper body stretch 

  Nothing new about this one , but it works . 

  Stand up straight and circle both arms as widely as possible first forwards and then backwards . 

  Then place your hands on your hips and stretch over to one side and then the other . 

  Knees and stamina 

  Put both feet almost together and jump from side to side . 

  A variation on this is to jump up and try to tuck your legs into your chest , touching your knees with your hands . 

  Laura McCaffrey went dry slope skiing at Calshot Activities Centre , . 

  A list of dry ski slopes in Britain is available if you send an SAE to the Ski Club of Gt Britain 

  WALKING IN NORWAY 

  Fjord Transit 

  Beryl Pyecroft braves the North Sea to spend a fantastic walking holiday travelling around the mighty Norwegian fjords 

  Being a total landlubber I was filled with trepidation as I set foot on the deck of the Norway Line's good ship Jupiter . 

  The thought of more than 21 hours on the North Sea was not exactly appealing . 

  But the crossing from Newcastle turned out to be a mini holiday in itself and very soon we were nosing our way through the islands and reefs which guard the entrance to Bergen's Hanseatic harbour . 

  From Bergen we continued northwards via single track railway to Voss where we boarded a bus for the final leg of our journey . 

  The narrow road , complete with alarming hairpin bends , wound its way over the mountains giving breathtaking views of lakes , fjords and waterfalls before descending into the fruit-growing region of the Hardanger Fjord . 

  Virtually unexplored and uncharted until the mid-nineteenth century , this area was the inspiration of artists , musicians and writers -- composer Edvard Grieg spent his summers here and playwright Henrik Ibsen was inspired to write Peer Gynt by the legends and folklore of this part of Norway . 

  The Hardanger Fjord , flanked by lofty mountains , penetrates inland some 80 miles from the sea . 

  A small finger of water stretching north creates the Ulvik Fjord , with the village of Ulvik along its shore . 

  A green , hilly peninsula separates Ulvik Fjord from its companion Osa Fjord . 

  The fjords are enclosed by bare rocky peaks which are totally impassable in the winter and still touched by snow , ice and glaciers in high summer . 

  It used to be possible to skate over the frozen water from Ulvik right out to the Hardanger Fjord , but now the hydro-electric station discharges gallons of hot water into the fjord , and it no longer freezes in winter . 

  Ulvik is an ideal centre for exploring this area . 

  There are many options open to the tourist -- from car hire , coach tours and steamer trips to flights over the glaciers in a seaplane . 

  But walking is undoubtedly the best way to get the " feel " of the land . 

  Our first day's walk took us along stony tracks , through forests of birch and pine and into a narrow valley . 

  The steep sided mountains with a dense covering of trees rose majestically from the valley floor . 

  Misty cloud hung suspended not far above our heads while all we could hear was the trickle of water . 

  An unexpected gap in the mountains beckoned us to a silent lake fed by waterfalls and surrounded by woods with banks of moss , lichens and fungi alive with lemmings scurrying among holes and tree roots . 

  A steep climb through bracken and bilberries brought us to a wide rocky plateau . 

  The roar of water grew louder as the path continued through a wood . 

  Suddenly we were stopped in our tracks by the sight of a mighty torrent , swelled by heavy rain , thundering down the mountainside and into the foaming river below . 

  Defeated by river and rain , we retreated to our hotel for a typical " cold table " of meats , fish , cheeses , salads and sweets . 

  On another day we chose a forest track starting from sea level at Ulvik which climbs steeply onto the mountainside . 

  Larch and spruce shelter nature's own rock garden with the forest floor carpeted with many species of wild flowers . 

  Finches , grey wagtails , woodpeckers and numerous other birds filled the air with song while the friendly lemmings scampered around showing little fear of humans . 

  Once we reached the banks of the reedy Frystetjorn Lake , over 1,700ft above sea level , we rested our weary bodies . 

  The air here was strangely still and silent after the noise of the forest . 

  A few unoccupied wooden cabins and a skeletal rowing boat , still chained to its mooring , were the only signs of human intrusion . 

  The view from Frystetjorn was unforgettable -- brightly painted houses set on a patchwork hillside , orchards heavy with bright red apples and the village of Ulvik , its white church being caressed by the sunshine . 

  Next was a gentle walk around the wooded peninsula to take a closer look at Osa Fjord . 

  The two fjords , so close together , could not be more different . 

  At Ulvik Fjord there is a quayside , bobbing boats , and the village stretching along its bank , at Osa the mountains drop dramatically straight into the water . 

  Our final walk was a tough ascent to the 2,000ft high Jonstolen plateau . 

  We slowly sweated our way up the steep mountainside on wet , slippery grass which gave way to wetter , slippier rocks looming vertically out of the swirling mist . 

  We had reached an idyllic Norwegian scene . 

  There was a rock-strewn plateau where cows with bells and a few sheep were grazing peacefully . 

  A small lake reflected the cliff face of the towering mountain range above . d There was also a cluster of wooden huts on the plateau -- summer retreats where the townsfolk recharge their batteries before winter sets in once more . 

  Time moves on for all of us and the next day we were homeward bound , hoping , like Peer Gynt , to return some day . 

  Main picture : Ulvik Fjord -- real chocolate box views . 

  Left : Ulvik village . 

  MARKET ROUND UP 

  BASELAYER 

  Calvin Klein eat your heart out . 

  Sexy underwear's got nothing on thermal britches and vests when it comes to keeping you cosy in the depths of winter . 

  We take a look at nine of the hottest designs around that'll send you panting off to the outdoor shops 

  KARRIMOR 

  Action Base Layer roll neck long sleeve top and long johns . 

  Design : 

  ABL top has a high neck which can be rolled over , and a long zip for ventilation . 

  Loose fitting long johns have elasticated waist and gusset with fly . 

  details of RONHILL omitted as non-text 

  SURVIVAL 

  Pure silk vest and long johns . 

  Design : 

  round neck , long sleeve top and long johns , women's and men's designs available . 

  DUOFOLD 

  Zip neck top and performance tights . 

  Design : 

  zip neck , long sleeve top with lightly padded stand up collar . 

  Tights are close fitting with elastic waist band . 

  ROHAN 

  Muztag top and leggings . 

  HELLY HANSEN 

  Lifa Super Shirt and Trousers . 

  Design : 

  crew neck , long sleeve top with stripy inserts down sleeves . 

  Trousers ( long johns ) are available with or without fly . 

  SUB ZERO 

  Factor one round neck top and long johns 

  Design : 

  long sleeve top available for men and women . 

  Also men's long johns and women's sports tights . 

  NORTH CAPE 

  Zip turtle neck top and long johns . 

  Design : 

  zip front top with lightly padded stand up neck plus long johns . 

  BERGHAUS 

  Zip neck shirt . 

  Men's pants . 

  Design : 

  zipped high neck top ( skiing style ) with long sleeves . 

  Men's pants with gusset and side slit . 

  WINTER CLOTHING 

  DRESSING UP 

  LAYERING 

  Layering is not just about keeping warm . 

  It means keeping cool , too . 

  In fact , what it boils down to is the most efficient system for regulating your body's own little micro-climate , without burdening your rucksack with all manner of garments designed for one specific set of conditions -- a waterproof duvet jacket for example . 

  And that has to be good news for backpackers keen to shave pounds off the weight in their rucksacks . 

  From the insulation point of view , several thin layers work better than one thick one , and it provides the all-important flexibility for intermediate control which your waterproof duvet jacket could not even approach . 

  Apart from the possibilities of weather changing during a walk , layering also provides a flexible response to your own levels of exertion . 

  When you're slogging your way uphill , chances are you shall need a layer less than when you're cruising along the straight and level . 

  The idea has been around for ages , of course -- people using two thin woollen sweaters rather than one thick . 

  But with the introduction of all manner of high-tech fabrics from super-wicking next-to-the-skin materials through to lightweight breathable waterproofs , the integrated approach to clothing has become a whole lot more attractive . 

  But it's important to make sure all the fabrics in the different layers work in harmony together . 

  For example a non-breathable waterproof layer will make ineffective the performance of good base and mid-layers . 

  CLOSE FOR COMFORT 

  Thermal underwear ? 

  " Thermal " is a word gradually slipping into the past . 

  Not that there's any shortage of warm underwear for winter use . 

  In fact , the priority of base layers , as most manufacturers prefer to call them these days , is to keep you dry rather than warm . 

  But warmth tends to come as a matter of course simply because the base layer eliminates the clamminess which makes you feel cold . 

  This works by the fabric's wicking features which allow sweat to pass through it . 

  And there are now fabrics treated with special antibacterial finishes , designed to keep the pongs at bay . 

  WARMING UP 

  Mid-layers perhaps provide the most versatility in the layering set-up , and these days the buzz-word is fleece , that warm and cuddly fabric which took over where fibre-pile left off . 

  Fleece garments vary in weight and thickness -- the lighter versions are usually better suited to more active roles , while the heavier ones come into their own during very cold conditions , or as evening wear around camp . 

  Technical advances in fleece continue apace such as with the stretch version which gives improved insulation and greater mobility through a closer fit . 

  There are also now specialist fleece tops using windproof linings such as Gore's Windstopper and Malden's Polartec Series 1000 Windproof . 

  However if you want to stay true to the layering principle and have the greatest possible versatility , it's better to have separate fleece and windproof layers . 

  WINTER WARMER 

  A windproof layer can be used over the base layer in warm conditions , and when it gets chillier , over your fleece . 

  The modern microfibre fabrics which work so well in windproof garments are also quite often pretty goo din the wet . 

  They're not totally waterproof , but they will see off pretty stiff showers . 

  They also scrunch down to virtually nothing in your pack . 

  WEATHER SHIELD 

  The outer layer is the totally waterproof one , and if you're going to follow the performance fabric ideology through to its logical conclusion , then a breathable waterproof is essential . 

  Many manufacturers have their own breathable fabrics these days , others use Sympatex or the best known top-of-the-range breathable , Gore-Tex , which is available in a variety of configurations . 

  Three-layer Gore-Tex is without doubt the most robust , but the two-layer versions with separate linings win hands down on versatility and packability . 

  The Karrimor Baltoro Snow Jacket pictured here uses Ferrara Gore-Tex , based on a super-lightweight abrasion and tear resistant facing fabric . 

  Keeping your bottom half dry is just as important . 

  Waterproof trousers with leg zips are the best bet for walkers , while winter walkers and mountaineers will find salopettes with full length side zips a better deal when wearing crampons . 

  TOTAL COVER-UP 

  The entire outfit will protect you when you're walking in the most dastardly of British winter conditions . 

  And , peeled off a layer at a time , it will take you through a wide spectrum of weather conditions and levels of exertion . 

  Round it all off with a pair of boots to suit your level of walking , some gaiters to protect your lower leg and stop debris getting into your boots , and you're ready for anything ! 

  Do not forget protection for your head . 

  You have more sweat glands and blood vessels per square inch in your scalp than any other part of your body . 

  And to an extent , a hat can regulate the way the rest of you feels . 

  If your hands are cold , try putting a hat on ! 

  But there comes a point when even a hat is not enough to keep your hands warm , so do not forget a pair of gloves . 

  And if you're heading anywhere where you could encounter snow and ice , make sure your equipment includes ice axe and crampons , and the knowledge to use them properly . 

  NATURE WATCH 

  NOVEMBER 

  LADY FERN 

  With most of the ground cover vegetation gone , now is the time to look at ferns . 

  At a distance many species look similar and only closer examination reveals the difference . 

  Lady fern , pictured here , has an elegant appearance with graceful fronds up to three feet in length . 

  Turn the frond over and look at the underside . 

  Here you shall find the " sori " , the structures which contain the spores . 

  The form of these is important for species identification . 

  Bracken is probably the best known of the ferns . 

  Recent research has shown that the spores of bracken are carcinogenic , so it's a good idea to avoid walking through large stands of bracken when the spores are ripe from July to August . 

  CALOCERA FUNGI 

  At the other end of the scale are the tiny calocera fungi , highly noticeable in spite of their small size because of their bright yellow colour . 

  There are three species , calocera glossoides , found mostly on dead oaks , calocera viscosa , found almost exclusively on dead conifers , and the one pictured calocera cornea which is found on a wide range of dead deciduous trees . 

  It's inedible , but who would want to bother anyway , since they are at most two inches high ! 

  Species similar in appearance , but growing on the ground , will probably belong to the clavulinopsis genera or families , but it's easy to be fooled by fungi seemingly growing in the wrong habitat . 

  Sometimes the fungi is not growing in the soil proper but just under the ground on the decaying foot or stump of a tree , so a little investigation is necessary in these cases . 

  ROOK 

  With the wet end to the summer , there may be fields where the crop has been left unharvested . 

  Look out for flocks of birds tucking into it -- among them will be rooks . 

  Confusion can arise over the identification of the rook and the crow . 

  The first difference is that crows are usually solitary or in pairs , while rooks are gregarious . 

  So if you see a flock of crows they are rooks , or if you see a solitary rook , it's probably a crow ! 

  The adult rook also has a white patch at the base of the bill , where the crow's bill and face are all black . 

  In flight the wedge-shaped tail of the rook is supposed to help identification , but it's hard to spot as the bird is constantly moving its tail . 

  In winter , rooks roost communally with jackdaws . 

  SHAGGY PARASOL 

  The wet start to autumn has meant a bumper crop of fungi . 

  Two notable species are the shaggy ink cap Coprinus conatus and shaggy parasol Lepiota rhacodes . 

  Both species are tall with large caps . 

  The shaggy ink cap is also called the " lawyers wig " because of the white woolly cap . 

  As the fungus ripens , the cap turns black at the edge and liquefies . 

  The black liquid contains the spores and was once used as a cheap substitute for Indian ink . 

  The habitat of the ink cap is in grass , rubbish heaps and on disturbed soil . 

  In contrast , the shaggy parasol is found in woodland , especially among conifers . 

  When mature the cap forms a pale pink flat disc up to six inches across . 

  MISTY LANDSCAPES 

  The changeable weather that November brings can lead to misty conditions , especially in the valleys . 

  Walking uphill can suddenly bring you out of the mist and into the sunshine , with beautiful panoramas . 

  Photographing this type of landscape can be difficult because the large amounts of white in the view will cause the exposure meter to underexpose the scene . 

  Take a meter reading off an area of grassland and lock in . 

  It's also a good idea to " bracket " the exposure by a stop either side of the indicated reading -- and a polarising filter will improve the results dramatically . 

  With an SLR camera rotate the filter while looking through the viewfinder until you get the best effect , then take the meter reading . 

  With non-reflex cameras , hold the filter in front of the eye and rotate . 

  When the required effect is seen , note the position of the filter and put it on the lens . 

  If the filter covers the exposure meter , take a reading with it in place , if not , note the amount of compensation recommended on the filter and use that to alter the reading . 

  THE LAKE DISTRICT IN NOVEMBER 

  The Lake District needs no introduction and the secret is to find the area usually ignored by those planning walks . 

  Arnside , nestled into the north-east corner of Morecambe Bay , offers an alternative to the overcrowded hills further north , and when the weather is too bad for the tops , there is still plenty of interest here . 

  Arnside Knott is a large limestone outcrop and offers a considerable diversity of wildlife with its varying habitats of woodland , pasture , and scrub . 

  Looking over to Grange over Sands from Arnside 

  NATURE WALK AROUND ARNSIDE 

  This walk of about six miles takes in a variety of habitats including sea shore and mixed woodland . 

  There is much wildlife to see , so do not forget the binoculars and give yourself plenty of time , it's not a route to be hurried ! 

  In places the path can be wet and slippery , so obviously wear your boots . 

  Take the track which is a continuation of the access road to the Arnside Knott car park . 

  After a short distance you reach a gate with a gap at the side . 

  Go through this and continue on the good track into the woodland , passing a " crossroads " with a wall and gate on the right . 

  Go straight ahead on the route signed Silverdale and Arnside Tower . 

  The track eventually drops down to a road . 

  On this stretch , watch out for the trees on both sides of the track . 

  Many have multiple thin trunks growing up from the ground -- they've obviously been coppiced in the past . 

  On the left , where the limestone is exposed , you can see how the tree roots travel over the surface and form abstract sculptures . 

  Cross the road and take the obvious lane on the other side which leads to a farm and the prominent Arnside Tower dating from the 14th century on the hillside above . 

  Follow the lane as it bears right and across the farmyard , passing through a metal gate to the right of a white farm cottage . 

  Turn left up to the tower , passing it on your left . 

  Ahead there's a stile over a wall , but before that to the right is a metal gate with a squeeze stile and go down the track between a hedge on the right and a fence on the left . 

  After a short while you come to two iron gates side by side . 

  Take the green gate on the left and continue to a tarmac road . 

  Go along this for about 50 yards , then turn off right and drop down towards the wall and then towards a big double metal gate ahead . 

  Do not pass through , but turn left and follow the fence which is on your right until you reach a narrow green gate which lets you into the meadow . 

  Cross the meadow to a new wooden kissing gate on the far side . 

  Pass through this and follow the wall on your left which leads to another kissing gate . 

  As is so often the case , these gates have been made by someone who has obviously no experience of walking , because they are impossible to negotiate with a rucksack on , unless you climb onto the bottom bars of the fence around the gate to lift the sack above the top rail . 

  The second gate leads to a road , which you cross to another road opposite leading to Far Arnside Caravan Park . 

  Continue on the road through the caravan park . 

  Eventually it splits , with the left fork going to Shore Creek . 

  Take the right fork signed White Creek . 

  Note here the sessile oak trees , their acorns without stalks , and also the hawthorns , which have had a magnificent crop of berries -- " haws " -- this year . 

  Where the road starts to bear to the right , a surfaced road , with " No Entry " signs , turns off to the left . 

  Follow this and enjoy the view across the sands towards Heysham in the distance . 

  When the road turns sharply left in a hairpin bend , take the footpath ahead into the woodland . 

  Note the trees here , sessile oak , beech and ash . 

  When the track splits at a sign warning of incoming tides , take the left fork towards the shore . 

  The track does not go onto the shore , but goes along the top of some low cliffs above the beach . 

  Where the underlying rock has been exposed , the path could be slippery in wet conditions . 

  You will be grateful for your boots around here but take care . 

  Eventually you emerge from the trees and the panorama opens up across Morecambe Bay . 

  This is an important area for wildfowl during the winter months , and if the tide is coming in it's worth finding a comfy place to sit and watch the geese , ducks and waders feeding at the water's edge , gradually being pushed closer by the tide . 

  There are several wood ants nests along the stretch , so before sitting down just check that the area's clear ! 

  In places the path becomes narrow and rocky and needs care . 

  The trees along here include silver birch , yew and holly . 

  It's odd to see how much smaller the trees clinging to the cliff face which are exposed to the salty winds off the sea are compared to those growing in the more sheltered woodland later in the walk . 

  When you reach a signpost saying White Creek and Arnside , cross the broken wall , turn left and soon you emerge onto a grassy clearing giving a first class view onto the sands -- and no wood ants ! 

  The town you can see on the other side of the bay is Grange over Sands . 

  Continuing on , the path re-enters the woodland to a caravan park . 

  Follow the cinder path through the caravan park until you reach a surfaced road . 

  Turn left on this , and at the next junction turn right . 

  After a few yards the sea appears once more on your left , and in the distance , a railway viaduct crossing the bay . 

  Follow the metalled road for about 200 yards until you reach an iron kissing gate on the right with a footpath sign to Arnside Knott &amp;amp; Silverdale . 

  Pass through this and cross the meadow to reach a metal gate with a stone stile at the side of it . 

  This leads to a wide track through woodland . 

  The track climbs steadily through the woodland where the yew trees are of special interest . 

  The fruit of the yew is important in the autumn and winter for mistle thrushes , redwings and fieldfares , which feed on the soft flesh , while greenfinches and bullfinches feed on the hard kernel . 

  The tiny goldcrest , our smallest bird , can also be seen here . 

  After about a quarter of a mile the track emerges onto more open land dotted with trees , and you can find some lovely juniper bushes here . 

  Note also the Scots pine . 

  This is an area for green woodpeckers , which surprisingly are more likely to be seen searching for food on the ground than in the trees . 

  Other animals you might spot in the woodlands are red squirrels and roe deer . 

  The track continues , re-entering dense mixed woodland , climbing still . 

  Turn left at a high drystone wall , collapsed in places , and continue until you emerge onto another track . 

  Turn left and follow the track back to the car park . 

  At one place on the walk , there's clear evidence of a badger track crossing the route -- there's flattened vegetation and the observant may spot badger hairs . 

  For obvious reasons I am not telling exactly where , but anyone seeing this can award themselves ten Brownie points ! 

  Arnside Tower , a prominent hillside landmark dating from the 14th Century 

  NATURE WALK FACT FILE 

  Youth Hostel 

  Check opening times with hostels over the winter period . 

  Camping 

  Telephone in advance during winter months . 

  Closed from end of October to beginning of March . 

  1000 WORTH OF KARRIMOR WINDSTOPPER AND FLEECE JACKETS TO BE WON 

  PERFORMANCE WITH STYLE 

  Win the latest designs in Karrimor Windstopper and Fleece Jackets . 

  Ten lucky readers will be the proud owners of the latest Karrimor performance jackets . 

  The first three prizes will win the Baltoro Reversible Windstopper Jacket . 

  This garment combines the warmth of Maiden's Polartec 200 fleece with the latest 100 % windproof material from W L Gore . 

  Designed to be worn either way out this is truly two garments in one , equally at home on the ski slopes , hills and the bar . 

  Seven runners-up prizes of Karrimor's Zulu Jacket are available . 

  Using Polartec 200 material these jackets are high on warmth and style . 

  HOW TO WIN 

  Using the words associated with Karrimor products listed here , start with the central B and trace a continuous line through the letters forming the words . 

  You may move up , down or horizontally to find the next letter but not diagonally . 

  Each letter is used only once and there are no spare letters . 

  Cut out the coupon , a photocopy will do , fill in your name , address and size details and post to : 

  OUTDOOR NEWS 

  FOOTPATHS 

  TOWPATH UPGRADE 

  Walkers and cyclists will soon find it easier to travel between Bristol and Bath following the resurfacing of a section of the River Avon towpath . 

  Avon County Council provided 80,000 to resurface a stretch of the path , just over a mile long , between Brasmill Lane and Nelson Villas in Bath . 

  Previously this section was overgrown and full of potholes . 

  The money will also be used to provide better signposting for existing access points to the towpath . 

  Peter Atkinson from Bath City Council said " It is hoped that there will be additional improvements in the future such as a sculpture and interpretative trail . " 

  TRUST SET UP 

  A trust has been set up in the wake of the tragic Pakistan International Airlines crash in the Himalaya in memory of outdoor pursuits lecturer Brian Rollins ( aged 40 ) , who was on board . 

  The crash happened when the PIA Airbus A300 crashed into the mountainside on its approach to Kathmandu Airport on Monday September 28 . 

  All 167 passengers were killed . 

  One of 35 Britons on the plane , Brian was part of a six person group who'd planned a trek to Tharpu Chuli . 

  The aim was to help climbers Dave Harries and Mick Hardwick acclimatise before they attempted the first British ascent of the Polish Route on Annapurna I. 

  Apart from lecturing on the outdoors at South Manchester College , Brian was a founder member of the Challenge Club -- aimed at letting people realise their full potential through outdoor activities . 

  He also organised fund raising exercises such as the Big Push from Wembley to Manchester to raise money to take 100 people , mostly disabled , on an adventure holiday in Austria . 

  The aim of the new trust is to continue Brian's work . 

  Money raised will go towards building a mountain hut , with disabled access , in the Lake District National Park . 

  If you'd like to contribute send a cheque or postal order to : 

  COMPETITION WINNERS 

  Well done Stephen McCann of Leyland in Lancashire and Helen Balcombe of London . 

  You're the winners of Outdoor Action's September Adidas competition and you shall shortly be receiving Adidas Adventure Equipment waterproof jackets and pants and Adventure High walking boots . 

  And congratulations to our two second prize winners -- N Dunbar of Eastbourne and S Sutton of Workington in Cumbria , who'll each receive an Adidas Equipment Adventure Polar Fleece . 

  Third prizes of Adidas Equipment Adventure T shirts go to Tim Holland of Scunthorpe and W I Jones of Gwynedd . 

  The answers were : 

  Unlucky this time ? 

  Well turn to page 35 for your chance to win one of ten great outdoor jackets from Karrimor . 

  News from the National Parks 

  Peak District protected against road development 

  A proposal to make the A628 , which passes through the heart of the Peak District National Park , into a dual carriageway has been scrapped by the Department of Transport ( DoT ) . 

  Their position was made clear following the publication of a study they commissioned into improving road links across the Pennines between Manchester and Sheffield . 

  Upgrading the A628 -- one of the most direct routes between the two cities -- was one of the suggestions , but the DoT stated that it remained committed to its policy that " No major development should take place in national parks except in exceptional circumstances . " 

  Coincidentally the results of another recently released study , commissioned by several local authorities , Passenger Transport Executives and the National Park Authority , shows that 65 % of journeys between Sheffield and Manchester are made by rail rather than road . 

  This suggests that improving public transport between the two cities should also be considered . 

  Further road plans 

  Both Snowdonia and the Pembrokeshire Coast National Parks are under threat from road schemes announced as part of the Trans-European Road Network ( TERN ) . 

  Under the proposals from Brussels the M4 would be upgraded for maximum heavy goods use , extending it all the way along the Pembrokeshire Coast to Fishguard . 

  The A5 meanwhile would be converted into a motorway through Snowdonia . 

  Minister of State for Wales Sir Wyn Roberts said the Brussels proposals were " just not on " . 

  New cycle trails on the North York moors 

  The Forestry Commission have opened some 32 miles of new mountain bike trails in the Langdale Forest , north-west of Scarborough . 

  The three new paths are five , 12 and 15 miles long and their waymarking is colour coded to indicate their level of difficulty . 

  The Forestry Commission believe that as well as catering for a growth sport , building these new routes helps separate bikers from walkers , so helping both to enjoy the forest in peace and safety . 

  Payment for climbing ? 

  Some landowners on Dartmoor are trying to enforce a booking system and even payment for the use of facilities on their land such as rock outcrops for climbing . 

  Organisations such as the British Mountaineering Council see this as the thin end of the wedge where payment will be demanded for access to land which has previously been open to the public . 

  News supplied by the Council for National Parks 

  CONSERVATION 

  DELAY THREATENS BIRDS 

  Thousands of birds are under threat because of a delay in designating a proposed site in the Peak District as an Environmentally Sensitive Area ( ESA ) . 

  The moorland in the South West Peak was proposed for ESA status in 1991 and the designation failed to come into force this summer as planned . 

  Because the area is now supposed to be designated , farmers have been ineligible for grants from the many government conservation schemes . 

  This has led to farmers overstocking animals on the land which has had a devastating effect on birdlife . 

  An RSPB survey shows the populations of lapwing and snipe have declined by over half , curlew by a third while ouzel numbers have crashed by 70 % to just 18 pairs . 

  RSPB spokesperson Frank Lucas says " It's especially worrying that we have discovered a serious decline in bird numbers in what should be one of the best protected areas in the UK . 

  " The Government can not afford to continue to neglect its responsibilities for wildlife , and here that means helping farmers with grants for conservation in place of grants for over-grazing . " 

  KIDS CLEAN UP 

  Youth club groups around the country have a chance to win a share of 5,000 worth of prizes while helping to enhance the environment in the Youth Action For The Earth competition . 

  The 7,500 clubs around the UK are invited to enter a team of five people to carry out a local environmental project . 

  This can be anything from cleaning an old pond to tree planting or landscaping a piece of waste ground . 

  It's up to the club to choose , although it must benefit the local community in the village , town or city where the club is based . 

  Outdoor clothing manufacturers Craghoppers will be supplying top of the range outdoor clothing as prizes . 

  Judging will take place in June next year . 

  COUNTRYSIDE 

  CALL FOR MORE ACCESS TO WOODLANDS 

  Greater access for walkers to forest areas is beneficial not detrimental claimed the Forestry Commission ( FC ) at the launch of a booklet intended to persuade owners and managers to open up their woodland areas to the public . 

  Raymond Johnstone of the FC said the greater numbers visiting woodland areas would increase people's understanding and appreciation of what foresters are trying to achieve . 

  And regular visitors , he argued , start to assume some of the responsibilities of wardens , such as the reporting of forest fires . 

  " In many cases , access to woodlands could be the solution rather than the problem , " he argued . 

  BONINGTON SPEAKS OUT 

  Following his election as President of the Council for National Parks , Chris Bonington called for all the national parks to be set up as separate authorities as soon as possible , in line with the Government's manifesto promise . 

  Bonington said he also hoped to see closer co-operation and understanding between the national park authorities and the farmers , tourist operators and everyone else who lives and works in the parks . 

  " As leaders in environmentally friendly practices , the parks have a vital role to play in showing the way in which fostering the well being of communities and conservation of our natural heritage can go hand in hand . " 

  HARD TO PLEASE 

  The Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) must feel they are in a no-win situation . 

  They have just announced that they plan to stop training on common land at Holcombe Moor near Manchester . 

  They no doubt that conservation groups would welcome the move . 

  However the Open Spaces Society , though happy with the decision , have launched a major offensive on the MoD . 

  They argue that the move shows that they cannot be trusted . 

  The MoD had claimed at a public inquiry in 1988 that they needed the land for training and in 1991 asked to extend the area further . 

  General secretary of the Society Kate Ashbrook argues that the change of mind shows that " The predictions , promises and guarantees given at the inquiry have been proved wrong . 

  It underlines yet again the need for an independent investigation of the MoD's alleged requirement for all its landholdings in the UK . " 

  HELP FOR UPLANDS 

  Financial support to help restore damaged upland areas has been agreed in principle by the Camping and Outdoor Leisure Association ( COLA ) , the umbrella body representing outdoor gear manufacturers and retailers . 

  Working in conjunction with the British Mountaineering Council and the Ramblers' Association , COLA plans to set up the British Uplands Footpath Trust . 

  No firm date has yet been set for the launch of the Trust and it has yet to be decided exactly how it will operate . 

  But the broad aim will be to perfect a scheme where money is raised on a continuous basis to fund upland restoration work . 

  COLA Director Gerry Thompson said they are waiting for ideas to formulate . 

  " We think the concept is right but have not exactly worked out how yet . " 

  One of the ideas mooted which has won some support is the introduction of leaflets at outdoor gear retail outlets . 

  The leaflets would explain the work of the Trust and invite people to make a donation . 

  Funds raised will help the battle against erosion in upland areas 

  Outdoor Action writer Paul Traynor is tackling a long backpacking trip along Italy's northern Apennines -- the country's spinal mountain chain . 

  His walk began at Passo Della Cisa , north of La Spezia , and he expects to be walking for six weeks or more . 

  " The area is far more rugged and wild than I expected and some of the ridge walking has been spectacular " Paul told us from Italy . 

  " So far I've seen eagles and many other birds of prey and I am keeping a close eye out for wild boar . " 

  Look out for a full account of Paul's journey in a future issue of Outdoor Action . 

  MULTI-ACTIVITY 

  SETTING SAIL 

  The Royal Yachting Association ( RYA ) is designating 1993 as Year of Youth Sailing in order to attract more young people to take up dinghy sailing and windsurfing . 

  To boost interest they're encouraging their 1,500 clubs , along with RYA recognised sailing schools , to hold free open day taster sessions . 

  The RYA also plans to restructure their training courses to make it easier for pupils to advance from beginner levels to racing proficiency . 

  The initiative will be launched at the London International Boat Show at Earls Court in January . 

  For details of events contact the RYA on . 

  CAVE CANCER SCARE 

  Cavers should not be put off by the recent radiation scare , according to the National Caving Association . 

  The scare was caused by a report which showed that cavers were sometimes being exposed to levels of radiation , in the form of radon , up to 800 times the official safety limit in homes . 

  Dave Edwards , Chair of the National Caving Association's working party on radon , says that it's important to put the risk of catching cancer in this way into context . 

  " It's similar to the chance you take when you spend time in a smoky pub . 

  And in fact by far the most dangerous thing that cavers do is drive . " 

  BUYERS' GUIDE 

  OUTBOUND THEBE TUNNEL TENT 

  The Thebe is easy to erect . 

  The inner goes up first and is supported by two hooped shockcorded fibreglass poles -- one at the front and one at the rear . 

  The pole ends slot into small securing posts at ground level . 

  It comes with a spare pole section which is a good idea . 

  I liked the way the flysheet securely fixes to the inner with a clip at the base of each of the pole ends . 

  There are eight other pegging out points . 

  In strong winds , however , the sides of the tent had a tendency to cave in and flap about . 

  A guyline at the centre of each side would prevent this . 

  A third pole is inserted into the front of the flysheet to extend the bell end . 

  This gives ample room for cooking and storage . 

  A small porch at the rear can be used for other small items , although access is only from inside . 

  The entrance has a central panel with twin one way zips so it rolls up and fastens at the top to give easy access . 

  Ventilation is good with mesh netting at both ends on the flysheet allowing air to pass through easily and both vents on the outside have stiffened weather flaps . 

  Condensation was also not a problem -- even on the wettest of days there were only a few tell tale signs on the flysheet . 

  Dave's verdict : this is a good general purpose tent which is nice and roomy for two and offers excellent value for money . 

  MOUNTAIN RANGE HARTSIDE WATERPROOF JACKET 

  Design : light/ mid-weight wind and waterproof jacket . 

  Features two waterproof pockets with stud flaps , two way zip , inner zip map pocket , double studded storm flap , detachable storm hood . 

  Fully taped seams on the Gore-Tex lining . 

  Materials : outer fabric -- sanded microfibre ; drop lining -- Winter Lite Fore-Tex ( combination of fleece and Gore-Tex membrane ) . 

  Comes with 3 year guarantee . 

  KOHLA WANDERSTOCK WALKING STICK 

  Design : adapted ski pole -- a modern version of the traditional walking stick . 

  Features include telescopic design to adjust height and ergonomic handle . 

  Available in two models : two part pole adjusts from 30in-41in , three part pole from 21in-42in . 

  Three part version is available with a summer or winter snow basket as an optional extra . 

  Optional rubber tip to cover metal tip for road use available for both models . 

  WENGER WATCH 

  Design : classic styled outdoor watch , water resistant to 330ft , stainless steel screw back , all weather rubber/ leather strap , Tritium hands and numbers for night use . 

  BRIDGEDALE OUTDOOR ACTION EXPLORER SOCK 

  Design : knee length walking sock with elasticated toe and high density protection pads . 

  FLITTERMAN RIGA FLEECE 

  Design : designed for general outdoor use with large cotton flapped pocket , two side entry pockets , elasticated cuffs . 

  MOUNTAIN EQUIPMENT NIMBUS JACKET 

  Weighing in at only a few ounces , you hardly notice that you're wearing this jacket . 

  But do not let the lightweight feel fool you -- the first time I wore it was during a 70mph mountain winds and driving rain and it kept me both warm and dry . 

  The jacket also breathes well . 

  When I used it with a 50lb rucksack there were no sweaty damp patches . 

  The materials which give this high quality technical performance are the outer sanded microfibre material with microporous coating combined with a smooth Pertex lining . 

  As part of Mountain Equipment's Compak range of garments , the jacket packs down small into a mini bag . 

  The jacket is refreshingly plain in design with a single front zip and Velcro storm flap . 

  There are two slanting zip pockets with weather flaps and an inside pocket which is not quite large enough to take a full size OS map . 

  The small detachable hood is fixed onto a high neck collar with press studs and the drawcord pulls in tight . 

  On the bottom hem of the coat there is also an adjustable drawcord . 

  The generous cut under the sleeves allows good freedom of movement and the cuffs come with small Velcro adjusters . 

  Dave's verdict : the jacket can handle at least three season wet weather use and is well suited for lightweight backpackers and overseas travellers . 

  SCOTTISH NEWS 

  THE THINGS THEY SAW 

  Recently overheard : a tourist getting off the Cairngorm ski lift saying to a friend " Lovely view " . 

  The friend replied : " Yes , but there's not much else ! " . 

  Another remarked that once one had seen the ostriches ( he meant the ospreys at Loch Garten ) , the Aviemore Centre , and been up in the chair lift to Cairn Gorm there " was not anything else to do " . 

  Ugh ! 

  LETHAL POLLUTION AT LOCH AWE 

  What dreadful news it is that a lethal , new form of algae pollution has been found in one of Scotland's best known lochs , lovely Loch Awe in Argyll . 

  Driving through Kilmartin , south of Oban , I saw two notices calling public meetings to discuss pollution -- the first I and many others had heard about this problem . 

  It follows on the much-publicised situation at bird reserve and fishing Mecca , Loch Leven in Kinross , where years of industrial and farming pollution bear part of the blame for green algae . 

  Researchers at Dundee University have identified a poisonous blue-green algae bloom at Loch Awe , not previously recorded in British upland freshwater lochs . 

  Two dogs died after eating some . 

  The algae is a benthic ( bottom-dwelling ) variety , unlike the planktonic , floating blooms which regularly damage the freshwater environment of Loch Leven . 

  Biologists believe the same benthic algae may have been responsible for animal deaths on Loch Lubnaig , near Callander , not far from my Stirling home , and at Loch Insh on Speyside in the past two years . 

  Argyll and Bute district council did post warning notices at Loch Awe advising people to keep children and pets off the shore , but these were recently removed after the hot weather which had made the problem worse was over . 

  Recognising the problem , The Scottish Office is funding a research programme at Dundee University to provide " a better understanding of the potential health hazards ... in waters used for recreational and drinking purposes . " 

  LAIRDS OF ALL THEY SURVEY 

  Medieval Scottish castles were once the homes of kings , queens and local lairds , but a three year ecological survey , commissioned by the Government agency Historic Scotland and undertaken by Northern Ecological Services , is finding new castle inhabitants . 

  MAR LODGE WATCH 

  It's good to see some sound sense being talked about the Mar Lodge estate controversy by the John Muir Trust , fast becoming one of the foremost environment bodies in Scotland . 

  Together with the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds , they were one of the three main partners in the conservation consortium who tried unsuccessfully to buy the estate . 

  The Trust regrets that after a year of negotiation it was not possible to assemble a complete package which would have allowed for purchase price , future management and costs for the extended period necessary . 

  " This property still remains an exceptionally important part of our natural heritage , but its future is unresolved " says the Trust . 

  The three partners are to remain in contact to maintain a watching brief and to prepare a document outlining ideas for future management of the property . 

  They would hope to discuss this with any new owner and with Scottish Natural Heritage . 

  The Trust adds : " The immense work done by the three principal participants , Simon Pepper ( WWF ) , John Hunt ( RSPB ) and Nigel Hawkins ( JMMT ) and the crucial role played by Chris Brasher has to be acknowledged and we can only regret that their efforts were not rewarded with a more positive outcome . " 

  MISSING MUNRO 

  I know this is a long way after the event , but were you on Beinn Sgulaird , Argyll , on June 21 as part of the Boots Across Scotland ( BAS ) Fundraising Day ? 

  The charity planned to have sponsored groups climbing all 277 Munros -- but organisers believe Beinn Sgulaird was missed out . 

  If you know different contact : who would like to get this year's books completed . 

  FILM RIGHTS 

  I am glad to report that Captain Alwyne Farquharson of Invercauld who has estates on Royal Deeside and on the island of Mull , has finally abandoned his opposition to a film crew building a temporary track on the island . 

  Associate producer and star Denis Lawson -- best known for Local Hero -- said that filming of The Dead of Winter had been postponed and might even be switched from Mull to Denmark , even though the story is set on Mull . 

  Film locations have a significant part to play in boosting tourism and the making of the film will pump an immediate 250,000 into the local economy . 

  Captain Farquharson has now said that provided planning permission was given and the track area restored , then the film crew could go ahead . 

  COUNTING ADDERS 

  Seen any adders in recent times ? 

  It's the only snake native to Scotland and the only poisonous one in Britain . 

  It's rare for a human to die from an adder bite , but it has happened . 

  And there are generally one or two people who get ill each year after a bite . 

  Yet the adder is a quiet and retiring beast . 

  Bites generally occur when someone has sat down in woodland , bracken or heather , unaware that they are close to or on an adder . 

  Under a recent amendment to the Wildlife and Countryside Act ( 1981 ) it became an offence to kill or injure adders -- this is in addition to previous legislation prohibiting the sale of adders . 

  And now Scottish Natural Heritage has asked the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology , Banchory , in liaison with the Scottish Agricultural Statistics Service and Biosphere Consultancies , to do a study to determine the current status of adders in Scotland . 

  The public are being enlisted to help by filling in a short questionnaire which will provide information on the distribution of adders . 

  I've already completed mine : my son and I disturbed one on the main path leading up to The Merrick , in Galloway , and ranger Fred Gordon and I saw a very angry one on the path in Glen Cairn in the Cairngorms . 

  I saw another on the West Highland Way , near Conic Hill , and friend Ronnie Leask found a dead one when a group of us went to the Jura . 

  Questionnaires from : 

  LETTERS &amp;amp; QUERIES 

  COUNTRYSIDE IS FOR ALL 

  This month's winning letter comes from Phil Thompson of Hampshire who wins a spanking new Lowe daysack . 

  I write with regard to Nick Rawlins' letter about screaming 16-18 year olds in the countryside . 

  I teach just such a group of boys , only they come under the title " Emotionally and Behaviourally Disturbed " . 

  When you take them out of their high rise environment they are highly stressed and lack confidence and self esteem . 

  Teamwork is out and behaviour such as your reader witnessed is common . 

  As for discipline , I have to work within the Children's Act . 

  I regularly take such groups of boys walking , and sometimes spend a lot of time apologising to other walkers . 

  Generally , by the end of the school year we culminate in a week on Dartmoor and by this time the boys have confidence in their ability and have learned the skills necessary to enjoy the freedom of the outdoors , keeping within the Country Code . 

  Please be patient , I work long and hard making sure these boys get there in the end . 

  There is a tendency to get annoyed when you meet over-noisy kids in the countryside but hopefully after reading your letter people will think twice before condemning their behaviour . 

  CANOEING CONVERT 

  I am the delighted winner of the Outdoor Action Splash competition and I'd just like to say that Andy Middleton and his colleagues gave us a great time on our week's holiday at the Twr-y-Felin outdoor centre . 

  I went canoeing , rock climbing and abseiling . 

  My friend and I were made very welcome at the centre -- the staff , atmosphere and facilities were excellent , as was the food . 

  The holiday was one I have always dreamed about and I would highly recommend the centre to any outdoor enthusiast . 

  I was also very pleased with my Prijon T Slalom kayak and Schlegel Allround X-treme paddle . 

  Canoeing is new to me , so I am having canoe handling lessons at a local swimming pool and the local Bridgend Venture Scouts have very kindly offered to lend me a buoyancy aid , spray-deck and helmet until I can afford my own . 

  Glad to hear you had such a good time . 

  Remember us when you win the slalom Olympic gold . 

  BUY BRITISH 

  The economic and unemployment misery daily portrayed through the British media should make us all more aware that we must begin to look after our own . 

  I went to a well-known outdoor equipment and clothing firm in London yesterday to buy a daysack . 

  As I was looking through the products of many well-known " British " firms , I was disgusted to find all were made in countries like China , South Korea and Taiwan -- anywhere but Britain ! 

  The argument that cheaper labour costs force manufacture abroad should not be acceptable to us as prospective purchasers . 

  I refused to buy any of these products , telling the vendor why . 

  I hope that others , who likewise enjoy the beauty of walking and other self-propelled activities around our lovely countryside , will take a similar stand and buy more British products . 

  Q 

  I intend -- for the first time -- to continue my regular backpacking weekends right through the winter . 

  I wonder therefore if you could tell me which kind of camping stove would perform best in winter conditions ? 

  A 

  Look for a low slung stove with a wide base to give extra stability in windy conditions and on rough ground . 

  And use a windshield for more efficient burning . 

  Some stoves come with these ready fitted . 

  And if you're going to use your stove in chilly conditions , you shall need to pick a model which uses a fuel capable of coping with the cold . 

  Avoid stoves which use butane , which will not burn at temperatures below around 4C . 

  If you want a gas stove -- and they are very easy to operate -- choose one which runs on a mix of butane and propane . 

  Meths stoves , like the popular Trangia , tend to work better in wind and can cope with cold , but you might find the meths a little difficult to light in extreme cold . 

  Petrol stoves burn hot and are generally fine in cold weather , though it may be necessary to pre-heat the burner on some models . 

  Fumes can be smelly and some people do not like the stoves sometimes flaring badly during lighting . 

  Enjoy your winter backpacking ! 

  Q 

  I would like to have a go at some serious birdwatching , but I do not know where to start . 

  I can tell the difference between a sparrow and a swan and that's about it . 

  And where should I go to see something a bit more interesting than garden birds ? 

  A 

  You need to do three things . 

  Buy both a good , clear pair of binoculars , a clearly illustrated field guide to British birds and join the RSPB . 

  The binoculars should be powerful enough for you to see what you want but not so bulky that you find them too heavy and awkward to hold for any length of time . 

  Choose a pair with a magnification of between 7 and 10 times and an objective diameter ( which affects the brightness of the image ) of between 30mm and 50mm . 

  In order to distinguish one small brown fluttering thing from another , you shall need to buy a decent field guide . 

  A particularly good one is The Complete Birdwatcher's Guide by John Gooders . 

  It's too big to take out with you but the drawings and descriptions of over 300 common British birds are great for teaching beginners what to look out for when trying to identify a new bird . 

  It also lists most of the significant UK birdwatching sites where you can see a host of species including seabirds , birds of prey and waterfowl . 

  When choosing one of the many pocket field guides around , make sure any illustrations actually look to you like the birds they're supposed to depict . 

  It sounds obvious but some drawings of birds are so odd you'd have difficulty identifying even a bluetit from them . 

  Listening to tapes of bird calls will help you identify unseen birds too and help direct you to the best place to stand and look for them . 

  Joining the RSPB is a must . 

  Not only are they one of the best campaigning organisations around , keeping the welfare of British birds well up on the conservation agenda , their quarterly magazine is full of interesting information on different species as well as tips on the best places to go . 

  And you shall get information on the RSPB reserves around the country -- especially good places to start birdwatching . 

  Adult membership costs 18 per year . 

  GEAR GUIDE 

  TENTS 

  A decent tent can mean the difference between a good night's rest and a total washout so it's important to get the right one first time around . 

  Our comprehensive guide will help you choose 

  FLYSHEET 

  This is the outer layer of the tent designed to protect you from the elements , usually wind and rain , but it could also be from heat . 

  These shells were traditionally made of cotton , a durable and weatherproof fabric , but heavy by today's standards . 

  Cotton threads expand in the wet which means that the fly , although heavier , becomes more taut and more weatherproof . 

  Cotton also fights the deterioration caused by the sun better than modern alternatives . 

  Today's flysheets , especially on lightweight tents , tend to be most commonly nylon or polyester . 

  These will have a waterproof coating on one or both sides . 

  Both are lighter than cotton but neither are as durable , nor as watertight . 

  To improve the water resistant performance the flysheet seams can be sealed . 

  In quality tents the seams often come ready-taped , in budget models we recommend that you buy some seam sealant and do the job yourself . 

  Nylon does have an exasperating trait of expanding in the wet and cold , causing the fly to sag . 

  This means that you shall have to reposition your anchor points -- cords attached to various parts of the fly to add stability in high winds -- when the rain sets in , and especially if the wind comes up too . 

  Expedition models can have a snow valance on the fly -- an extra skirt around the bottom which can be laid on the ground and anchored down by snow or rocks . 

  INNERS 

  These are usually made of cotton , polycotton or nylon . 

  Cotton is warmer and more durable but heavier . 

  Nylon inners are coated to repel any drips from the fly . 

  The shape of the inner depends on the design of the tent , but to all but lightweight buffs it can be the deciding factor of your purchase . 

  Sit inside the tent before buying to get a true idea of the available space . 

  GROUNDSHEETS 

  These are usually sewn into the tent and cover the bottom plus two or three inches up the sides of the tent . 

  Most groundsheets are made of nylon and are coated with either pvc or pu . 

  The strength , durability and weight of them depends on the weight of fabric used and how much coating has been applied . 

  Budget tents often have a woven polythene groundsheet . 

  This is very strong but is noisy , heavy and bulky . 

  PITCHING 

  Pitching can be fly first , inner first or , increasingly , inner and fly together . 

  Both fly first and inner first designs have advantages . 

  Tents with a self-supporting inner can be used in hot weather without the fly . 

  Wetter climates favour tents that go up fly first so that the inner and your gear can be protected as quickly as possible . 

  Pitching inner and fly together can be a time saver , but obviously the inner must be detached from the fly if you need to split the weight for backpacking . 

  One advantage of the fly and inner going up together is that the inner is kept at a set distance from the fly , preventing the two from touching and allowing moisture to leak through to the inside . 

  PORCHES 

  A covered area under the fly but not part of the inner -- pretty essential in wet weather for storing gear and for use as a cooking area . 

  But take great care lighting stoves -- tents are highly flammable . 

  Never cook inside the inner . 

  Porches , also known as bellends , can be found anywhere on the tent , depending on the design . 

  Larger tents often have two , one for storage/ cooking and one for access . 

  All entrances close using zips -- look for the better quality self-repairing coil zips . 

  To make the zips last longer make sure there's no strain on the bottom by pegging the anchor points of the flysheet at the bottom of the zip diagonally across each other -- some tents have hooks or Velcro to secure them . 

  Four season tents and mountain tents should have two way zips so that you can still get out when the bottom of the fly is covered in snow , and they may have storm flaps to help keep the weather out . 

  POLES 

  Basically there's a choice of two materials -- aluminium alloy or fibreglass . 

  Alloy is lighter , stronger and more expensive than fibreglass , which tends to be used in budget tents . 

  Most poles are flexible with several short sections shock-corded together for quick assembly . 

  On cheaper tents they may not be shock-corded . 

  Some ridge tent poles are springs to " snap " pole sections together . 

  Repair kits , if not supplied with the tent , are cheap and a wise investment . 

  If a pole is beyond repair most manufacturers can supply replacement poles or lengths of pole you cut to fit . 

  MOSQUITO NETTING 

  Check the fineness of the mesh depending on where you're going -- British mossies are small . 

  Mesh also allows for good ventilation , keeping condensation problems down . 

  Some models have mesh at both ends for just this purpose . 

  For doors with both full nylon and full mesh panels , make sure the mesh is on the outside so that you can open the weatherproof door without letting any of the baddies in . 

  PEGS 

  Most tents come with a combination of straight pegs for hard ground and angled or V-shaped pegs for softer soil . 

  The majority are made of aluminium alloy which is lightweight but can bend . 

  GEODESIC OR DOME TENTS 

  A true geodesic has a criss-cross of poles which gives greater stability in high winds 

  Internal shape is high and wide , ideal for long spells inside the tent 

  Pole arrangement allows for a wider variety of different and interesting shapes 

  Tent is free standing , good for selecting the ideal pitch once erected 

  Smaller versions are ideal mountain tents 

  Design easily accommodates more than one entrance , especially important in larger tents 

  Alternatives Basic dome -- the three pole dome has three poles that cross at a central point . 

  This allows good use of space , but high winds compress the sides . 

  Smaller versions are more robust . 

  The two pole dome originated on the continent but is best used in protected valley pitches . 

  You can also buy really tough but heavy steel pegs which you can hammer into very hard ground with a rock . 

  Always carry spare pegs . 

  TROUBLE SHOOTING 

  Condensation Sorry , but no matter what , nylon tents will develop condensation . 

  You can ease the problem though -- ensure that the fly and inner are not touching anywhere , then try repositioning the fly so that there is space for good air flow between the bottom of the fly and the ground . 

  Increase ventilation by lowering two way zips from the top . 

  Leave the inner tent door open a fraction , even if you do not have mesh . 

  And pitch in a well ventilated spot . 

  General care 

  Pitch away from trees -- sap ruins flysheets . 

  Do not leave your tent pitched all day for a prolonged period -- this will degrade the flysheet . 

  Keep the tent clean and always pack it away totally dry , storing it in a well aired place . 

  If stored damp mildew will form . 

  Mildew is destructive to cotton whereas nylon looks stained and smells a bit but the fabric remains intact . 

  To get rid of mildew wash your tent in warm water and dry it thoroughly using a proofer with a mildew inhibiter . 

  This treats the tent and prevents mould growing back . 

  Nylon is made waterproof during the weaving process using a high temperature/ oven baking method which can not be repeated on a made up tent . 

  A coating is often then placed on the outside for additional protection . 

  When the main waterproofing coating starts to wear away -- very quickly or after many years depending on use and care , you can try to reproof it . 

  This can be done in the bath or the garden , but it's often better to send your tent to the experts . 

  This is not expensive -- around 20 for a two person lightweight model -- and manufacturers should be able to put you in touch with repairers in your area . 

  Reproofing is only a temporary measure . 

  If the nylon itself breaks down the tent is irreparable . 

  Actinic Degradation This is the breakdown of ( mostly synthetic ) flysheets through prolonged exposure to the sun , but no-one really knows why it affects some tents and not others of the same make and model . 

  The result is a fragile , almost paper-like fabric . 

  Reduce the risk with the following precautions : 

  Take the tent down during the day to minimise ultra-violet exposure from the sun . 

  Pitch in a well ventilated area . 

  Do not pitch close to objects that will reflect the sun's rays onto the tent , such as white caravans . 

  Beware of prolonged high altitude camping . 

  Running repairs Carry a repair kit including a groundsheet and flysheet fabric , self-adhesive tape , glue , a spare pole section , spare apex , pegs etc . 

  TUNNEL AND HOOP TENTS 

  Wind will compress the sides if pitched badly or wind direction changes 

  Excellent use of internal space 

  Pitched tail into the wind they offer good stability as long as the side walls are not too high 

  Not all poles are equal length 

  Certain shapes are more aerodynamic than others and the small versions make good mountain tents 

  All tunnels need good use of guylines to improve stability unless they have an internal bracing system 

  Alternatives Variations have four , three , two or single hoops . 

  Single hoop tents need to be pitched with the pole pointing into the wind and have the flexibility for more than one entrance and porch 

  More and more tents are coming onto the market which do not necessarily conform to these definitions but they will rely predominantly on one system for their stability . 

  Ask the sales assistant to outline the features of any tent before you buy . 

  RIDGE TENTS Ridge pole for added strength ( optional ) . 

  Lightweight buffs usually do without 

  Extension of fly for larger porch area 

  Ideal water and snow shedding shape , sturdy design 

  Inner space limited by angle of the sides . 

  A transverse ridge counters this by having the length of the ridge run across the sleeping area . 

  Poles -- originally upright poles which restricted access , not A shaped for ease of entry . 

  Budget models may have upright only . 

  Pitch tail end into the wind , keeping entrance protected from the weather . 

  Design will stand wind direction changes well 

  Majority tend to be budget models 

  Alternatives Transverse ridge -- greater inner space . 

  Sloping ridge -- usually lightweight variation of the standard . 

  Lower tail end eliminates space at feet , pitches into the wind to improve stability 

  OUT &amp;amp; ABOUT 

  Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country . 

  Walks compiled by Catherine Moore 

  1 

  A long walk through the remote area of Assynt 

  2 

  Through the Inverliever Forest to Loch Avich 

  3 

  Climbing Arran's highest mountain Goatfell 

  4 

  Stroan Bridge Walk near Loch Trool 

  5 

  Around the common land of Cockfield Fell 

  6 

  The Maguire Trail through Northern Ireland's lakeland 

  7 

  The Sandstone Trail along the central Cheshire ridge 

  8 

  A walk into railway history on the Marriot's Way 

  9 

  Exploring the Aylesbury Arm of the Grand Union Canal 

  10 

  Tor y Foel and the reservoir in the Talybont Valley 

  11 

  The Greensand Way long distance trail 

  12 

  A journey through the moors around Langport 

  13 

  Dunkery Beacon : the highest point on Exmoor 

  14 

  The coast past from Swanage to St Adhelm's Head 

  ASSYNT WALK 

  Assynt is one of the loveliest and loneliest parts of the Scottish Highlands and this walk takes you through its heart . 

  From Elphin , go towards Ledmore Junction on the A835 . 

  About halfway , just east of the bridge over the Na Luirgean , a track goes north-west to Cam Loch . 

  Follow it for around two miles on the loch shore then turn right to gain a ridge . 

  Make your way to the north-west end of Lochan Fada where the track to Lochinver -- the first overnight stop -- become more obvious . 

  Continue on , passing along the shore of Lochan na Gainmh . 

  From Lochinver , go on to Little Assynt . 

  There are several possible routes to choose -- try retracing your steps as far as Suileag . 

  Take the left fork there and go north by Loch Crom and Loch an Leothaid to the bridge over Assynt Water to Little Assynt . 

  Make your way to the southern side of Loch Assynt and follow the shore as long as you can and then take the easiest line of travel staying parallel to the loch . 

  At An Coimhleun Forest , the way is blocked by cliffs . 

  Follow a wide gully south to the River Loanon . 

  Follow the south shore , crossing the river where it is shallow enough . 

  Make your way to the Inchnadamph Hotel on the A837 . 

  From Inchnadamph you take the A837 for 6.5 miles to Tunmore ( a single house ) . 

  Go over a fence to the left of the house to a burn at the back . 

  Cross it to the track going north-east up Creag na h-lolaire to a pass . 

  Go north-west down the Gleann Leireag . 

  Go by Loch an Leothaid and along the north shore of Loch Uidh na h-larna . 

  Walk to the B869 and Drumbeg . 

  LOCH AVICH 

  The Inverliever Forest runs along the northern shore of Loch Awe , just south of Oban . 

  Wildlife is varied here -- species include red , roe and sika deer as well as foxes , badgers , otters and wildcats . 

  There are lots of different walking and cycling routes to choose from . 

  This one starts from the Barnaline Car Park which is on the road running through the forest , just north of Dalavich . 

  It's a walk that's notorious for being wet . 

  From the car park , follow the forest road south-west towards the Dalavich Oakwood , which has been designated a Forest Nature Reserve because of its varied plant community . 

  This walk does not actually explore the reserve , but there are trails around it if you want to make a detour . 

  Past the reserve look out for a viewpoint over Loch Avich . 

  Half a mile past this the path branches off to the right , and goes through plantations to a large open glade known as the dry loch . 

  Eventually you will reach an area where you can see abandoned ruins of crofters' huts . 

  The path eventually emerges at an old fishing hut on the shore of Loch Avich . 

  From here it turns right to follow the shore until it reaches the mouth of the River Avich . 

  From here the path follows the river bank downstream and then heads back into the forest and away from the river before crossing a burn . 

  An old track lead back through the woodlands to the forest road and your starting point at the car park . 

  Make the time to walk by the lovely nearby Avich Falls if you can . 

  GOATFELL MOUNTAIN 

  Arran is just 19 miles long and ten miles wide , but within its boundaries there's some fantastic walking . 

  Goatfell is the best-known peak on the island . 

  It's also the highest , at 2,866ft , making it a Corbett -- one of the list of Scottish Mountains rising to over 2,500ft . 

  There are many paths leading to the summit of Goatfell . 

  This one starts from the car park near the Clacach sawmill , near Brodick Castle . 

  The trail is easy to follow , though it is a typical Scottish mountain walk and as such should be treated with respect -- proper footwear and clothing are essential . 

  The first part of the trail goes through the Brodick Castle Country Park . 

  It then rises steadily through a mixture of woodland and open ground before emerging on the flanks of the mountain itself . 

  For a longer , wilder and more challenging route you can explore the beautiful ridges around Goatfell leading to peaks like Cioch na h-Oighe , Cir Mhor and A'Chir . 

  The ridge walks are said to be second only to those of the Cuillin in Skye in terms of drama and scenery . 

  Some exposed scrambling is involved in these routes . 

  STROAN BRIDGE WALK 

  The Galloway Forest Park covers around 76,000 hectares of forest moorland and lochs . 

  With all this , as you'd imagine there are endless walking possibilities . 

  Good starting points are the many waymarked trails laid out by the Forestry Commission . 

  Of course these can be adapted to suit the individual . 

  This walk starts from Stroan Bridge -- where the road from Glentrool Village to Loch Trool crosses the Water of Minnoch . 

  It's marked with white waymarks . 

  From the car park it goes east for around a mile and a half before going south-west to the Water of Trool . 

  It carries on south-west by the water to cross by a bridge over toward Minniwick Moss . 

  It then works its way around Minniwick Moss , back to base . 

  It's easy to extend the walk by , instead of cutting down to go south-west of the Water of Trool , heading east to the western end of Loch Trool . 

  You can then follow the Southern Upland Way back along the south bank of the Water of Trool and walk on to Minniwick Moss . 

  COCKFIELD FELL 

  Cockfield Fell managed to escape the 18th Century Enclosure Acts and remains a valuable area of common land . 

  From St Mary's church in Cockfield , head for Fell Houses . 

  Beyond Fell Houses follow the old tramway . 

  Half a mile along the line , where the power cables cross the track , turn sharp right onto a tramway towards the river . 

  Once there , turn left to the sewage works . 

  Keep following the track past the Slack and Haggerleases Station . 

  Beyond the track , head uphill on the track to Cockfield . 

  After around a quarter of a mile , look back to see the outline of a Romano-British settlement . 

  Then follow the line of telegraph poles to the remains of an old railway bridge . 

  Turn right in Cockfield for part two of this figure of eight walk . 

  Go west , crossing the site of Holy Moor and Wigglesworth Collieries to reach Peathrow Farm . 

  Go over the bridge to Shotton Moor . 

  Follow the road for a third of a mile to the first stile on the left . 

  The path is waymarked and joins the road to Cockfield around Hollymoor Farm . 

  Turn left into Bleak Terrace and go back onto the Fell through the wicket gate to the village boundary wall . 

  Keep to the path with the wall on the right to return to St Mary's church . 

  THE MAGUIRE TRAIL 

  This walk passes through the lovely lakelands of Fermanagh and forms part of the 560-mile waymarked Ulster Way . 

  It's named after the Maguires , a powerful clan who rules in Fermanagh from the 12th to the 17th century . 

  From the village of Derrylin -- about twelve miles from Eniskellen on the Belturbet Road -- you follow the Ulster Way eastwards . 

  After about one and a quarter miles you detour east to Dresternan Castle , a small Georgian country house . 

  As the trail approaches the shore of Lough Erne on the main road it crosses the narrow channel of water between Trasna Island and the mainland and travels along the north shore of the island . 

  You cross over to the mainland again on the Lady Craigavon Bridge and follow the lough shore to Corradillar quay . 

  You join the main road at Shanaghy . 

  The trail goes onto the Derryadd Road and follows a quiet country road for around four miles with lakes on the right . 

  From Drumlone Cross , the trail goes on to join the main Lisnaskea-Newtonbutler Road . 

  Crossing the road it follows a path across country to a small road leading to Ballagh Cross and goes on to Armagh Manor . 

  From here the trail enters forest land taking paths leading to many lovely reed-fringed lakes -- Lough Corry , Lough Esheleagh and Carnmore Lough . 

  The trail continues to another section of forest at Mullaghfad , leading out of the forest onto a road and ends nearby at the Glenoo Bridge over the Colebrooke River on the boundary between Co Fermanagh and Co Tyrone . 

  THE SANDSTONE TRAIL 

  The central Cheshire ridge is a range of sandstone hills running the length of the county . 

  This walk follows these hills for 30 miles from north to south . 

  Look out for the waymarks -- a black footprint with an S on it . 

  The trail starts at Beacon Hill in Frodsham from where it makes its way south to Dunsdale Hollow and follows a cliff edge and wooded slopes to reach Woodhouse Hill Fort -- an iron age encampment . 

  The trail goes on along the side of Snidley Moor , on around the base of Alvanley Cliff and by Simmonds Hill , Manley . 

  You pass on to Manley Common and travel through the Delamere Forest to reach Nettleford Wood . 

  The route continues south , passing by one of the trail car parks at Gresty's Waste and goes through Primrose Hill wood and past Willington Wood to reach Wood Lane . 

  Continuing south you reach Oxpasture Wood , Fishers Green and the River Gowy . 

  From the river the trail goes to Beeston Crag , to the west of Peckforton Castle and eventually joins the road above Higher Burwardsley . 

  You walk on to climb the slopes of Bulkeley Hill from where you head for the village of Bickerton and on the heathland of Bickerton Hill . 

  The trail continues on to Larkton Hill and Larkton Hall and to the hamlet of Hampton Green . 

  The last section of the trail takes you from Bickleywood , on past Barhill Farm and across country to reach the Shropshire Union Canal . 

  You follow the towpath to the trail end at Grindley Brook locks . 

  MARRIOT'S WAY 

  Marriot's Way originally consisted of two lengths of railway . 

  One ran from Themelthorpe to Aylesham , the other from Themelthorpe to Norwich . 

  The railway now gone , the trail is open to walkers as well as horse riders and cyclists . 

  The path starts at Hellesdon north-west of Norwich and makes its way towards Drayton , Attlebridge , Lenwade and Blackwater to arrive at Thelmthorpe . 

  From here it goes east to pass to the north of Cawston before arriving in Aylesham . 

  At Aylesham the Way links up with the Bure Valley Walk which runs for nine miles to Hoveton . 

  ( At Hellesdon the Way carries on from the five-mile Norwich Riverside Walk ) . 

  The Way is named after William Marriot , chief railway engineer with the Midland and Great Northern Railway Company which once operated one of the now defunct lines . 

  Through its length the route is waymarked in the brown and cream livery colours of the Midland and Great Northern Railway Company . 

  There is a short diversion from the main route between Attlebridge and Lenwade at present . 

  The Thelmthorpe Link Path enables walkers to shorten the walk . 

  GRAND UNION CANAL : AYLESBURY 

  This walk follows the line of the Aylesbury Arm of the Grand Union Canal . 

  The walk starts from the canal basin in Aylesbury -- easily accessible , it's just a short walk from the railway station , the bus station and several car parks . 

  You reach it via Walton Street . 

  The walk is easy enough to follow -- it simply goes along the canal towpath on the south side of the canal until it reaches Marsworth . 

  The canal rises a total of 94ft 8ins along this section and you will pass 16 locks as you walk . 

  You can see many different bird species on the canal . 

  Keep an eye out for large swans , herons and ducks , moorhens and kingfishers . 

  Reed buntings and sedge warblers nest in the reed beds at the water's edge , while the yellowhammer is a common sight in the hedgerows . 

  And redwings and fieldfares migrate to the area to avoid the harsh winters in Russia and Scandinavia . 

  For variety and to make a longer walk you can try the three circular walks which leave the towpath at various points . 

  At bridge 14 you can join the Bierton Circular Walk which goes around the village of Bierton . 

  Alternatively you can leave the canal , crossing bridge 13 and follow a bridleway on old drove roads to rejoin the canal at bridge 8 . 

  Just before Marsworth a four mile circular walk leaves the canal at Watery Lane , follows a short section of the Grand Union Canal proper going north before returning across the fields to the car park at Startop's End Reservoir . 

  TOR Y FOEL 

  This walk takes you through the Talybont Valley to the summit of Tor y Foel . 

  It starts from the dam at the northern end of the Talybont reservoir . 

  To get there park at the Glyn Collwn car park , just south of Aber Village ( south of the B4558 near Talybont-on-Usk ) . 

  Go down the gated drive between the car park and the road -- walkers are allowed to -- down to the Vilter House . 

  In front of it , follow the waymark arrows across a footbridge and go left . 

  Follow a track and turn right up another drive to the eastern side of the dam . 

  Follow the tarred road , then the track , along the eastern side o f the reservoir . 

  Continue until the path emerges from the forest at a wooden gate and reaches a horizontal track -- the line of the tramroad . 

  Continue across this up the track to the surfaced road at Pen Rhiw-calch . 

  Turn sharply left along the road ( with the Caerfanell valley on your left ) . 

  At the farm entrance gate marked Bwlch-y-waun follow the path leading off up the open hill to the summit of Tor y Foel ( 1,806ft ) . 

  From here , head for the end of the plantation and when you reach the road , go through the gate opposite . 

  Follow the path down to the tramroad at the two gates . 

  Cross over the stile on the left and follow the path down , over the stream and down a slope . 

  Bear right towards a gate . 

  This leads onto the railway line . 

  Bear left to return to the dam . 

  THE GREENSAND WAY 

  The Greensand Way stretches for around 100 miles through Kent and Surrey . 

  Here we concentrate on the 55 miles which pass through Kent . 

  Limpsfeld Chart , though in Surrey , is a good place to start the Kent walk . 

  The Way goes over Crockhamhill Common and to Toys Hill -- at 804ft the highest point of the Kent section of the Way . 

  The Way continues to Ide Hill village . 

  The next section takes you from Brockhoult Mount to Cinderfield Wood . 

  You then pass through Shipbourne and south of Dunk's Green to reach West Peckham . 

  After going on to Nettlestead Green you cross the River Medway and River Beult to arrive in Yalding . 

  From here you continue to Linton and then Sutton Valence . 

  The villagers of Egerton , Pluckley and Little Chart mark the next section of the route . 

  Soon you pass through Hothfield Common , a National Nature Reserve . 

  You skirt Godinton Park to go on to Great Chart . 

  You reach your final destination of Hamstreet via Chilmington Quarry and the village of Kingsnorth . 

  The Way is waymarked , though a booklet giving a detailed route description is available from : 

  THE MOORS AROUND LANGPORT 

  This walk takes you through the water meadows and along the towpaths of the Somerset moors . 

  From the Cocklemoor River car park in Langport cross the footbridge and walk left along the north side of the River Parrett to Huish Bridge . 

  Turn right over the bridge and where you see a sign on the left for Muchelney and Drayton go through the gate . 

  Bear diagonally right across the field to the metal gate . 

  Enter an enclosed lane , turn left and go through the gate , turning immediately right to the metal gate/ rails . 

  Walk up the field crossing the rhyne ( ditch ) . 

  Aim for the old railway line and cross it . 

  Go through a white gate , go left and walk diagonally across the field , through a gate in the hedge opposite into a large field . 

  Bear left and go diagonally across the field to the far corner . 

  Cross the rails and go diagonally right to the gate . 

  Walk to the stile on the right . 

  Bear left , across the field to a gate in the opposite left hand corner by a copse . 

  Go through a gate into an enclosed section . 

  Go out onto the road . 

  Turn right and go through the village of Drayton . 

  Turn left after the Crown pub onto this straight road of around half a mile which then turns into a no through road to Midelney and Midelney Manor . 

  After a mile , at the bridge over the River Isle , cross the stile next to the gate on the left and follow the track by the river to the old Midelney Locks . 

  Here the River Isle joins the River Parrett . 

  Keep to the west bank of the Parrett and follow the towpath to Westover Bridge . 

  Cross the bridge and go through the gate on the right . 

  Follow the western tow path to Huish Bridge and retrace your steps to the car park . 

  DUNKERY BEACON 

  A walk to Dunkery Beacon , the highest point on Exmoor at 1,704ft . 

  Start from the Estate Lodge at Selworthy . 

  Walk ahead on road , past first road junction on left , to chapel crossroads . 

  Turn right on road to gate on the left 50 yards ahead . 

  Go through it to a track on the edge of the wood which then forks left up away from the edge of the wood to a clearing and then on to a second gate . 

  Walk west to woods . 

  At first junction go ahead towards the edge of the wood . 

  At the next junction take the left path signed Webbers Post . 

  Continue on rising path to road junction at Webbers Post . 

  Take the right fork to a clearing on the right of the road and take track on the left . 

  Before reaching the top of the road , take the track right through woods to a track crossroads . 

  Go left , then at path junction turn right towards the summit of Dunkery Beacon . 

  Take a path south for the last 100yds to the summit cairn . 

  Take the ridge path west to Great Row Barrow . 

  Turn right to Langcombe Head . 

  Cross the road and take path going north-north-east which then bears left to Stoke Ridge and goes down to the bend in the road at Stoke Pero . 

  Follow road north to a bridge at the stream . 

  Turn right beside the stream to junction with main river . 

  Turn right to Horner village . 

  Carry on north for 700yds to a gate in the hedge on the right . 

  Go through gate and cross field , bearing right to a stile . 

  Carry on through a strip of woodland and over a second stile . 

  Go east along field edge and down to stile . 

  Cross two fields to road , cross and follow sign " Holincote " . 

  Cross field going north-east then bear left around the edge of the next field and make your way back to Selworthy . 

  recommendation omitted as repeated from another issue 

  COAST PATH TO ST ADHELM'S HEAD 

  You get the best of both worlds on this walk -- the lovely Dorset coast path and a cross country route . 

  Start by picking up the coast path by the sea in Swanage . 

  Head west on it to Dancing Ledge -- a disused cliff quarry . 

  Carry on to Seacombe Cliff and turn up Seacombe Bottom until you see a stone marker on the left . 

  Go up the steps to the cliff top , turn left and continue on coast path to Winspit and St Adhelm's Head . 

  Visit the 12th century Norman chapel here . 

  From the chapel follow the rough road east , then north . 

  After about a mile turn east and then north to Weston Farm . 

  Turn right at the road and go into Worth Maltravers . 

  Leave the village along the road going north . 

  Take the right fork at the Square and Compass and after the stone houses cross the stile on the right . 

  Continue on to Eastington Farm and follow the Priest's Way east to South Barn and go just past farm buildings . 

  Turn left and double back behind buildings going north to the path junction . 

  Turn right to Belle View Farm . 

  Go through the gate , turn left past the stone houses and go through the iron gate . 

  Make your way through Swanage back to your starting point . 

  recommendation omitted as repeated from another issue 

  OUTDOOR PEOPLE 

  MOUNTAIN BIKE access director 

  As Access Director of the British Mountain Bike Federation , Colin Palmer is fighting for a fair deal for off-road cyclists 

  " I first got interested in the issue of access for off-road cyclists after two years' National Series racing . 

  I was appalled by the race organisers' lack of knowledge about land use and saw a real need to get involved . 

  Most of my work involves liaising with local access officers , but I also have frequent meetings with countryside organisations like the Forest Enterprise , National Trust , Country Landowners Association , National Farmers' Union , Council for National Parks and local authorities . 

  I am regularly impressed by the co-operation of landowners who are generally aware of their responsibilities and do not behave aggressively . 

  As well as recognising the fact that we need to get on with landowners , we realise that a strong relationship with local authorities is critical . 

  Without their goodwill you're on a hiding to nothing . 

  It's important for myself and other access officers to meet regularly with council officers to ensure cycling is not forgotten . 

  Some officers seem to be unaware that in terms of the number of people who do it , cycling's second only to walking . 

  It's obviously disappointing that the rights of way network is in such a state . 

  Funding is crucial but there is an organisational problem -- despite the fact that there's a huge amount of latent goodwill in the community , few councils have mobilised this in a co-ordinated way so that the rights of way network can be brought into line . 

  I also liaise with land users organisations such as the Ramblers' Association , British Horse Society and Cyclists' Touring Club . 

  As a result of these liaisons the rest of my job involves problem solving and development of initiatives . 

  I encourage cyclists to respect the fact that on all legal access routes there's a need to give way to walkers -- but I shall be the first to admit that this does not happen all the time . 

  More and more people from urban areas are using off-road cycles out of towns so a tolerance towards them is also necessary . 

  There needs to be a long term education of cyclists and I sincerely apologise to those walkers who have had any bad experiences . 

  At the moment I am involved in setting up a mountain bike orienteering scheme or " Trail Quest " . 

  The name Trail Quest is supposed to make it clear to cyclists that they should not stray away from legal routes . 

  I am looking to develop a National Series for Trail Quest competitions by 1993 . 

  It will be a very useful tool in teaching mountain bikers where they can and cannot go . 

  In some regions the concept of zoning -- designating areas exclusively to one type of user -- has been tried to solve problems about who can go where . 

  But it has only been half successful because everyone wants to be able to go everywhere . 

  There are no reasons why all groups cannot mix , except where the sheer numbers of users are dangerous . 

  This was the case in Snowdonia where the Llanberis Path descent from the top of Snowdon is very quick . 

  We suggested time limits to be introduced for cycle use on the route . 

  Cyclists are now asked not to use the route from 10am to 5pm and the response has been excellent . 

  I was recently filming there with the BBC's Country File and we spoke to some local farmers who said there were often queues of cyclists waiting at the start of the route for 5pm to come . 

  The Pennine Bridleway from Hexham to Matlock is another very important development . 

  Cyclists and horse riders are keen to progress with the scheme but there has been some opposition from one particular village . 

  We are campaigning through magazines asking people to write to their MPs about off-road cycling facilities and one way they could show their support , or give a sign of their intent , would be to push through the Pennine Bridleway . 

  The Forest Enterprise are well ahead of the game as far as provision for off-road facilities is concerned . 

  Their policy to encourage cycling , not the macho sort but for families , is very progressive . 

  They are waymarking routes which are well graded and not too difficult -- an increase in facilities will take people off the roads which cannot be a bad thing . 

  My own personal favourite mountain biking route is a permissive route which I am authorised to use but I would not like to advertise it . 

  I enjoy mid-Wales where the riding is good , although unfortunately the rights of way network is poor . 

  Once a month I go out for a serious session -- the last of which was a hard circuit of Radnor Forest , but I enjoyed it tremendously . " 

  SUBSCRIPTION OFFER 

  FREE BOOK 

  Subscribe now to get your free copy of John Cleare's Trekking -- Great Walks of the World worth 14.95 

  Every copy signed by the author ! 

  This book will whisk you away to some of the wildest and most beautiful trekking areas in the world : from the Annapurna Circuit in Nepal to the Mountains of the Moon in Uganda ; from the Royal Road of the Incas in Peru to New Zealand's Routeburn Track ; and from stormswept Patagonia to Vancouver Island . 

  The 13 treks outlined in Trekking -- Great Walks of the World are all written by experienced travel writers who give engaging accounts of their various adventures along with a real insight to the areas they visit . 

  Many of the writers are also professional photographers and this certainly shows -- the book is crammed full of sumptuous colour pictures . 

  Maps and illustrations also help to bring it alive . 

  Armchair travellers will be riveted to their seats while the more adventurous will get itchy feet . 

  For those wanting to satisfy that itch there is an extensive factual section with each trek giving lots of useful practical information . 

  We are giving every new subscriber to Outdoor Action a free copy of this invaluable book , each one personally signed by the author . 

  So here's a way to guarantee a brilliant read both now and every month -- take out a new subscription to Outdoor Action and we will send you your free copy of this top quality book , plus the next 12 issues of Britain's Brightest Outdoor Magazine , straight to your door . 

  But do not delay -- this offer is only open while stocks last . 

  If you do not want to cut your mag , a photocopy will be fine . 

  EDITORIAL 

  Standing astride the Cat's Back ridge in the Black Mountains with valleys on three sides it's impossible for your spirits not to soar with the buzzards flying high overhead . 

  I say astride , because this ridge , officially called Black Hill but known as the Cat's Back by the locals , is truly a razorback , narrowing to a foot or so wide in places . 

  Everyone will have their favourite ridge walk , and that's one of mine . 

  It really is splendid , an easy walk with just a short ascent to reach the beginning of the ridge . 

  From here you can reach Hay Bluff overlooking the Welsh border town of Hay-on-Wye , some five miles further on . 

  This month we asked Paul Traynor to choose some of his favourite ridge walks around the country -- a hard task as there are so many wonderful walks to choose from . 

  You can read his selection on page 14 . 

  If none of those grab your fancy , there are plenty of other stomping good walks in this month's issue of Outdoor Action . 

  On page 18 we've got Part Two of Paul Buttle's exclusively designed circuit of the Lakes , while on page 51 there's our new and improved Out and About section , with no fewer than 14 great walks from all over the country . 

  Those of us who are able-bodied have so many choices about where to go , what views we'd like to enjoy , how hard we want to make our bodies work . 

  Not everyone is so lucky . 

  Reading Roger Davis' account on page 42 is quite humbling . 

  Roger was a keen walker , cyclist and backpacker before a sleepy driver knocked him off his bike and confined him to a wheelchair for the rest of his life . 

  Now when he wants go get outdoors he finds so many ways barred to him . 

  Obviously he's never going to get his chair up serious hills on his own , but is it too much to ask for the planners of country parks and the like to consider less able users when planning level routes such as nature trails ? 

  Read his story and see what you think . 

  If you're into flora and fauna , Richard Marpole tells you what to look out for in the countryside this month on page 36 , while adventurers and armchair travellers alike can enjoy a walking trip to the Grand Canyon on page 27 . 

  So all in all there's plenty to read in this month's Outdoor Action , with plenty of walking routes , a test on dome tents , our comprehensive rucksack gear guide and plenty of other outdoor pursuits . 

  Happy reading ! 

  EDITOR 

  WHAT'S ON 

  OUTDOOR EVENTS 

  If something's going on your neck of the woods , we want to hear about it . 

  Send your event details two months in advance to Vanessa Thompson , Outdoor Action , . 

  12 MILE HIKE IN NORTH YORKSHIRE 

  August 23 . 

  Hike the open moorland above Helmsley on this 12 mile route which promises spectacular views and a chance to see the odd grouse or two . 

  The walk is organised by the North York Moors National Park and starts at 10am from Newgate Bank car park ( GR 563890 ) . 

  The walk is expected to last all day so bring a packed lunch . 

  The walk costs 1.50 for adults and 50p for children , OAPs and the unemployed . 

  For more information contact : . 

  WINDERMERE WATER WEEK 

  August 10-16 . 

  Enjoy a week of water-based activities in the beautiful setting of Lake Windermere in the Lake District . 

  Events and activities throughout the week will be aimed at enjoying watersports and highlighting safety and conservation issues . 

  There will be introductory sessions to dinghy sailing , windsurfing and canoeing -- booking is essential for these events , so call . 

  Water safety demonstrations will also take place and there will be a chance to learn first aid and resuscitation techniques as well as enjoying lake cruises and illustrated talks . 

  For more information contact : . 

  WALK IN SNOWDONIA 

  Mondays August 3 , 10 , 17 , 24 . 

  Enjoy an exhilarating walk in the lesser known areas of Snowdonia on this day event organised by the national park . 

  The walk will take you among the lakes and hills of the craggy countryside around Capel Curig . 

  For the first four Mondays in the month a walk will set off at 10.30am from Plas y Brenin National Mountain Centre ( GR 1718579 ) . 

  The walk costs 2.50 for adults , 1.50 for senior citizens and 50p for children . 

  Bring a packed lunch , warm clothing and waterproofs and wear stout footwear . 

  For more information contact : . 

  CONSERVATION IN DUMFRIES AND GALLOWAY 

  August 19-29 . 

  Enjoy a holiday with a difference on this Action Break organised by the Scottish Conservation Projects group . 

  The conservation work will focus on maintaining and upgrading footpaths in the Dumfries and Galloway region . 

  An experienced leader will give training in the necessary skills . 

  Volunteers should be aged between 16 to 71 . 

  Accommodation is basic , possibly a field centre , small cottage or village hall and everyone takes turns to prepare meals . 

  Food is provided . 

  Each volunteer pays 4 per day , 3 if retired , unemployed or a student . 

  For more information on this and other SCP Action Breaks contact : . 

  CYCLE RIDE IN NOTTS 

  August 2 . 

  Guided bike ride exploring the " flat lands " south of the River Trent between Newark and Aslockton . 

  The route is along quiet country lanes and points of interest along the way include a Civil War battle site , a redundant windmill and a 13th century church . 

  The ride is organised by Nottinghamshire County Leisure Services . 

  For more information contact : . 

  AUGUST DIARY DATES 

  1 

  Energetic mountain bike safari around Grizedale organised by Lake District National Park . 

  Bring lunch and your bike . 

  Bookings only . 

  Contact : 

  1 

  Open day at Spencer Road Wetlands organised by Sutton Conservation Group in Surrey . 

  10.30am to 1pm . 

  Contact 

  1 

  Three mile walk to McCartney's Cave on Thrunton Edge . 

  Involves a steep scramble . 

  Dogs on leads permitted . 

  Starts 2pm from Thrunton Woods car park ( GR NU 086 100 ) . . 

  2 

  Day course in map and compass skills at Sedburgh organised by Yorkshire Dales National Park . 

  Indoor and outdoor work . 

  10.30am to 4.30pm . 2.50 . 

  Contact : . 

  4 

  Learn to canoe from 1pm to 4pm in the North York Moors National Park . 

  Over 10s only . 

  6.50 . 

  Meet North York Moors Adventure Centre ( Park House , Ingleby Cross ) . 

  Contact : . 

  5 

  Have a go at orienteering in Calderdale . 

  Starts 6pm from Jerusalem Farm . 

  Free . 

  Contact : . 

  15 

  Free guided walk to Howtown via Moor Divock organised by Lake District National Park . 

  Starts 10.30am from Pooley Bridge Information Centre . 

  Lasts six hours . 

  Contact : . 

  16 

  Afternoon Ridgeway walk through a Victorian Estate on the edge of the Downs . 

  Starts 1.30pm on the Ridgeway where it crosses B4494 Wantage -- Newbury road . 

  ( GR SU 419842 ) . 

  Contact . 

  19 

  Three hour ridge walk in Nottinghamshire to Bramcote and Stapleford . 

  Starts 2pm from Bramcote Hills car park , Junction of Ilkeston Road and Coventry Lane , Stapleford , Nottingham . 

  Contact ; . 

  21-22 

  Edmundbyers youth hostel multi-activity weekend in County Durham organised by Wakefield YHA group . 

  Activities include mountain biking , canoeing , climbing or pony trekking . 55 including meals , activities and instruction . 

  Contact ; . 

  23 

  Coast path walk in Exmoor . 

  Starts 2pm for three hours from Hunter's Inn . 

  ( GR SS 655 481 ) . 

  Contact ; . 

  28 

  Wildflower walk in the North York Moors , 2pm from the Moors Centre , Danby , Whitby . 

  Contact ; . 

  30 

  Two hour walk in the Breamish valley of Northumberland , led by Shaun Hackett . 

  Starts 10.30am from Ingram Bridge car park . 

  ( GR NU 0171640 ) . 

  Contact : . 

  30 

  Walk the White Cliffs of Dover . 

  Starts 11.15am from Folkestone Central Station . 

  Returns by train from Dover Priory station . 

  Six miles . 

  Dogs on leads . 

  Contact : . 

  LETTERS &amp;amp; QUERIES 

  Got any problems ? 

  Something you want to get off your chest ? 

  Anything going on in the outdoors which interests , irritates or simply makes you laugh ? 

  If so I'd like to hear from you . 

  I shall do my best to answer any questions on the outdoors and to let you have your say , so there's no time to waste -- get scribbling now . 

  DORSET HEATH UNDER THREAT 

  This month's prize-winning letter writer is Andy Glaister of Bournemouth 

  I am worried about the future of one of the areas I enjoy walking in most -- Studland Heath . 

  This ancient heathland , which is an ornithologist's paradise , is undeveloped , quiet , clean and astoundingly beautiful . 

  The easiest way to reach the area is by chain ferry from Sandbanks at Poole . 

  The ferry can only carry a limited number of cars per hours . 

  Although this can lead to frustration for car drivers -- especially in the summer when large queues build up -- it helps limit the environmental damage to this very special area . 

  However , this is all due to change with the proposed introduction of a new chain ferry which will be able to carry twice the number of cars . 

  The quiet road on the heath has already been coarsely widened on both sides to form a half mile long car park with Pay and Display ticket machines . 

  With the building of this new road and planned ferry we are undoubtedly destroying the very thing that makes this area so special . 

  ABSEILING FEARS 

  I was a trifle concerned to see abseiling featured in the first section of your A-Z of Outdoor Activities supplement . 

  At the moment abseiling seems to be something of a craze , however I'd like to remind people that its primary function is as an integral part of mountaineering . 

  Abseiling is the most dangerous single thing mountaineers do and many of the world's greatest climbers have been killed abseiling . 

  So for those who are tempted to treat it as a game , please remember that it's not . , 

  FIRM ON ACCESS 

  I would not want readers to think I've gone soft on freedom to roam following a comment I made in July's Scottish News . 

  I said walkers should make a courtesy check with estates when doing a specific trek in Wester Ross , but I was only referring to the peak of the stalking period -- mid-August to mid October -- and not the whole year . , 

  FREE GIFT 

  To help you beat the irritation of bites and stings this summer , we have a 100 bottles of Stingose to give away . 

  This versatile pump spray treats stings from insects , plantlife and marine animals . 

  To receive one free just send your name and address on a postcard to , . 

  Q 

  I am planning to travel independently next year to India , Pakistan , Nepal and China . 

  My aim is to make a photographic record of these countries before the developing world we live in changes them forever . 

  However I am not sure where I can obtain information about the relevant countries , especially their laws and regulations concerning visitors . 

  Please could you help ? , 

  A 

  Get hold of a decent guidebook for each of the countries concerned . 

  If you do not want to go to the expense of buying them , check out the travel section at your local library . 

  The Lonely Planet guides are particularly useful for independent travellers . 

  The books give all the insider know-how for staying and getting around a country on a shoestring budget . 

  Entry and visa regulations are particular to individual countries , so for details contact their embassies in this country . 

  When buying your plane tickets it's also worth asking for information relevant to your trip -- many travel agencies produce fact sheets on the foreign destinations they go to . 

  Bon voyage ! 

  Q 

  I was horrified to find a notice at the bottom of Ben More stating No Dogs Allowed . 

  Our dog is our constant walking companion and is always kept on a lead . 

  I would like to know if the notice was legal and if there are any other Munros or Corbetts which display the sign . , 

  A 

  The law says that a dog does not have to be on a lead but it does have to be under control . 

  The reason the farmer at Ben More has put up the sign you talk about is that he has been particularly troubled by dog owners who cannot control their animals . 

  His land is crossed by the most popular route up Ben More and so this farmer does tend to suffer more than usual from disruptive behaviour from dogs . 

  And we should have sympathy with him for the sight of a strange dog -- whether on a lead or not -- can be enough to make sheep run and if pregnant they can miscarry . 

  There are other signs in the Corbetts and Munros where farmers suffer from a high level of disturbance . 

  And it should be noted that a farmer is entitled to shoot a dog if he or she thinks harm is going to be caused to livestock . 

  HELP NEEDED FOR DISSERTATION 

  As a mature student studying for a degree in Sport and Recreation studies , I am undertaking research into the Staffordshire Way . 

  I would be grateful if any of your readers who have walked all or part of the Staffordshire Way could write to me . 

  Details of how far they walked , how long it took them , when this was done and what sort of overnight accommodation they used , would be relevant to my research . 

  I would also be interested to know what other paths they had walked and what their perceptions were of these compared to the Staffordshire Way . 

  All letters would be greatly appreciated to assist me with my dissertation . 

  Please send them to me , , . 

  WIN A LOWE DAYSACK 

  Each month the writer of the best letter published wins this super Lowe Alpine Walkabout 25 daysack 

  SCOTTISH NEWS 

  Rennie McOwan has been hillwalking in Scotland for over 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors 

  Wild island 

  The SNH launch in the Western Isles turned out to be a spectacular event . 

  Over a period of five days teams of people walked , ran , cycled , rode , paddled and sailed from Inverness to the Western Isles , taking with them a marble stone -- a 1,200 year old saintly relic of St Ronan . 

  The stone is thought to have originally been taken from the sacred island of Iona to the island of North Rona where it formed part of the church altar . 

  On its new journey it was taken in turn by bike , canoe , sail boat , runners , riders , cyclists and walkers to the north-west , on to Skye and ultimately to Ness in Lewis , where the islanders have long had links with North Rona . 

  North Rona is one of Scotland's most remote islands , lying 30 miles north of the Butt of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides and 30 miles northwest of Cape Wrath in Sutherland . 

  It was once a retreat for the monks of the Celtic Church . 

  A few crofting families clung on there until the 19th century but the island is now uninhabited . 

  For people who collect islands in the same way others do Munros , North Rona is a tantalising target . 

  The tiny island is now a National Nature Reserve , famous for seabirds and seals . 

  There is no natural landing place , the seas are fierce , and permission to land is only given to groups who are have a suitable boat , and who are well provisioned , capable , and with a proven interest in an outdoor topic . 

  GREEN ALGAE POLLUTES LOCH LEVEN 

  Green algae in Lock Leven proves a timely reminder of the problems facing Scottish Natural Heritage at their south-eastern regional launch 

  The new government advisory agency , Scottish Natural Heritage , recently invited me to help judge a painting competition for schools . 

  The contest was judged at the fete-style launch of the South East region held at Kinross , on the shores of Loch Leven . 

  The standard of the exhibition work by primary school pupils on the theme of National Heritage was very high . 

  It's good to see that so many children are becoming literate in the ways of the countryside and gaining knowledge of their responsibility for the planet . 

  Ironically , one of the problems facing the new agency was , literally , on the doorstep . 

  The waters of Lock Leven , site of an RSPB reserve and one of the most important sites of its kind in Britain , were bright green with floating algae . 

  Some of the events on the loch had to be cancelled as a result . 

  The reasons for the algae's growth are complex . 

  Contributing factors include a very dry , hot summer which helps the algae to flourish , along with the residue of pesticides from farms and effluent from factories which , although greatly improved in modern times and now controlled , have left a residue on the loch bottom which still caused problems . 

  It was a startling picture of two sides of a coin -- a lively launch of an area of SNH by pleasant and caring people , and the inheritance of a mess created by the lack of knowledge and concern of past generations . 

  Ongoing saga 

  It is sad to see that conservation bodies seem to have halted their attempts to purchase the key Cairngorms estate of Mar Lodge . 

  The problem is both simple and complex : the lack of sufficient funds . 

  Although people are tight lipped about the reasons for the collapse of negotiations , there were clearly bureaucratic difficulties with so many conservation organisations being involved , along with government departments , SNH and even , according to reports , Prince Charles . 

  One can only pray for an owner with an enlightened view on conservation and access issues . 

  Blaven path repair 

  What good news it is that SNH have given a 7,000 grant for repair work on the path to Blaven , one of the most spectacular mountains in the Skye Cuillin . 

  The Scottish Mountaineering Trust has also contributed and work will be carried out by Pathcraft Ltd . 

  Visitor problems 

  The Scotsman newspaper has reported that the National Trust for Scotland has decided to stop publicising three venues because increasing visitor pressure there was harming either the building fabric or the ground . 

  The sites are Ben Lawers in Tayside , St Abbs Nature Reserve in Lothian and Craigievar Castle in Grampian Region . 

  The fact that NTS have deliberately cut publicity about Ben Lawers is not new and has been reported many times . 

  The main problem there is that a visitor centre was erected which , far from solving the access and erosion problems , has created even greater ones . 

  In my view the problems will only be solved by the centre's removal . 

  It also proves that the Trust's mountaineering benefactor , the late Percy Unna , was right when in his enlightened " Rules " he said such structures should not be built on mountain properties . 

  The St Abbs decision is no surprise . 

  I was there recently and the spectacular cliffs are a wonderful place to see seabirds from close up , but the paths were definitely showing signs of erosion . 

  Craigievar Castle too has special problems in that it is a tower house and can only take a limited number of visitors at any time . 

  This sensitivity to the effects of publicity is to be welcomed . 

  Some years ago NTS members who suggested such a tack were ridiculed for their pains . 

  Access debate 

  Management consultant , writer and outstanding mountaineer Alan Blackshaw has been appointed chair of an SNH " task force " set up to discuss the sensitive issue of public access in Scotland . 

  A preparatory public consultation paper will be issued this autumn and a more fundamental public discussion paper will be distributed next spring . 

  Access and freedom-to-roam are issues dear to the heart of most Scots , but it is not just boots and shoes that are involved nowadays , but canoes , windsurfers , paragliders , boats of all kinds , and bikes . 

  Alan has a thorny task and deserves all help . 

  OUTDOOR NEWS 

  NEWS IN BRIEF 

  Pennine Way 

  Anyone attempting to walk the Penning Way should equip themselves with a new free leaflet from the Countryside Commission . 

  It contains practical hints on walking the route , a list of key addresses for information points and explains the work being done to restore eroded stretches along the trail . 

  The leaflet is obtainable by post from Countryside Commission Publications , . 

  No to windfarms 

  Windfarms should not be allowed in the Peak District National Park according to a consultative document . 

  The latest version of the Park's Structure Plan , which sets out the basic strategy of the control of development in the park for the next 10-15 years , states that the visual impact of windfarms outweighs the net benefit to global conservation . 

  Cash for conservation 

  English Nature is making available 250,000 for grants aimed at encouraging local community groups to become involved in nature conservation projects in towns and cities . 

  This is the continuation of last year's Community Action for Wildlife grants scheme . 

  For further information contact : . 

  Walk opens 

  The Colne Valley Way running from Staines on the River Thames to the Grand Union Canal at Cowley has been officially opened . 

  The ten mile route uses a variety of public footpaths , bridleways and pavements through Horton , Colnbrook and Iver . 

  Over 40 new signposts and waymarkers have been installed , new stiles have been constructed and old ones improved . 

  For a copy of the Colne Valley Way leaflet send an A4 sae to , . 

  Changing faces 

  Well known broadcaster , author and journalist Jonathan Dimbleby has been appointed the new President of the Council for the Protection of Rural England . 

  He replaces film producer David Putnam who is standing down after seven years in the position . 

  GOOD TURN OUT FOR RAMBLERS 

  Environment Minister Michael Howard joined thousands of people who participated in one of the 150 walk events organised throughout the country by the Ramblers' Association for Family Rambling Day . 

  Michael Howard , along with his wife and son , took part with 50 others in an organised five mile walk in Ashford , Kent . 

  The focus of this year's Family Rambling Day -- now in its sixth year -- was to improve young people's map and compass skills . 

  At each event there was an experienced rambler or Ordnance Survey staff member to help interested youngsters with route finding . 

  Youngsters could also enter a map drawing competition and have the chance to win a Young Rambler's Adventure Kit of boots , rucksack and waterproofs . 

  The emphasis on map and compass skills comes in the wake of a near disaster last August when a group of 14 children and their young leader were airlifted to safety after being lost for two days east of Dalwhinnie in the Highlands . 

  They were wearing only tracksuits and trainers and had no tents , maps , compasses or food . 

  John Leonard of Ordnance Survey said " Learning to use a map and compass is as essential to children as learning to swim . 

  It gives them both safety and independence . " 

  WALKERS CLIMB FOR THE WORLD 

  This year's Climb for the World weekend in early June dawned misty and rainy but thousands of walkers and climbers were not to be put off . 

  In the Peak District and Northumberland National Parks many people held overnight vigils on appointed summits on the Friday and Saturday nights , while others walked to meet them on the summit . 

  Some simply made a private gesture and went on a walk of their choice . 

  All participants were demonstrating their commitment to the philosophy of Climb for the World -- One World , One Family , One Nature . 

  The organisers hope that the event will have raised 25,000 for charitable projects at home and in the developing world . 

  Founder Edwin Drummond had hoped to double this figure and confessed to disappointment at the response . 

  " Given there are some 100,000 climbers in the UK and only 100 or so took part , I cannot help but think that a tremendous message of indifference . 

  It's only thanks to the efforts of walkers that we've got so far . " 

  Northumberland National Park were pleased at the response and felt it was a very worthwhile event , while in the Peak District 17 schools took part . 

  Meanwhile in Rio de Janeiro as world leaders met at the Earth Summit , Drummond and colleague Tess Burrows climbed Sugarloaf Mountain to gain publicity for Climb for the World and to highlight the plight of the Rio street children . 

  READERS WIN GREAT GEAR PRIZES 

  Kath Bowen of Ystrad Mynach and E Crabbe of Andover , it's your lucky day . 

  You've each won the first prize in our June competition of a Rohan Shearwater Gore-Tex jacket and pair of the company's famous walking trousers , Rohan bags . 

  The six runners up will soon be kitted out with a Rohan Gobi Wear outfit consisting of a lightweight breathable jacket and a pair of lightweight active trousers . 

  They are . 

  If fate was not going your way do not despair . 

  Turn to page 31 to find out how you could win a fantastic Phoenix tent , waterproof jacket , or fleece jacket . 

  A NEW WAY TO WALK 

  Three outdoor enthusiasts have walked and cycled across the Pennines and through Europe to Istanbul in an effort to promote the proposed Trans-Pennine Way and send greetings of goodwill from 30 local authorities to European mayors . 

  Scheduled to open in 1996 , the Trans-Pennine Way will cover 330 miles ( 599kms ) of paths from Liverpool to Hornsea -- about 186 miles ( 300kms ) are already developed . 

  Along the British leg of the journey Richard Groom , Richard Lang Burns and Shaun Williamson collected signatures from mayors and other civic dignitaries for a scroll sending a message of goodwill from the people of England to the other European countries . 

  In mainland England the trio spent four weeks travelling from Holland through to Istanbul in Turkey , via countries including Germany and Bulgaria . 

  Covering between 25-50 miles a day , the trio collected further signatures for the scroll sending messages of goodwill back to the UK . 

  Two of the trio who walked and cycled to promote the Trans Pennine Way 

  MORE CYCLE ROUTES 

  Mountain bikers have been given greater access to Lancashire's most impressive countryside with new routes created by the West Pennine Moors Countryside Service . 

  After 12 years of negotiation the half mile footpath from Jepsons Gate to Alance Bridge , Anglezarke has been upgraded to bridleway status -- this means that both cyclists and horse riders may use it . 

  The trail is waymarked with blue arrows . 

  A concessionary one mile bridleway -- where use is granted by the landowner -- has been opened across the northwestern embankment of Yarrow Reservoir to link in with an existing bridleway . 

  And more cycling routes have been opened in Roddlesworth Woods and by Roddlesworth Reservoirs near Tockholes . 

  North West Water have two mountain bike leaflets to the area . 

  They cost 30p each from the Great House Barn Information Centre at Rivington . 

  - A new 11 mile cycle route through Great Glen , initiated by Forest Enterprise , gives cyclists an alternative to the busy A82 Fort William to Inverness Road . 

  - Oxfordshire Council has opened the Judges Ride , a 16 mile circular route for mountain bikers and horse riders through the Chiltern countryside . 

  News from the National Parks 

  Bypass plans dropped 

  Plans to build a bypass around Ambleside in the Lake District have finally been dropped by Cumbria County Council . 

  Strong public pressure opposed to the scheme and lack of funds led to the decision . 

  The County Council plans to concentrate on traffic management measures instead . 

  Coach ban 

  A limited ban on coaches parking in the village of Grasmere in the Lake District might be imposed to ease congestion . 

  It was proposed at a meeting of the Lake District Board that the coaches use the car park -- which would have to be enlarged -- on the outskirts of the village . 

  The Board narrowly decided that the environmental benefits to the centre of the village outweighed the disadvantages of a larger car park . 

  Sheep in need 

  Sheep are being introduced on the coastal slopes around Shrinkle Haven Youth Hostel to stop encroaching scrub and bracken further smothering the traditional vegetation of the area and damaging feeding grounds for coastal birds . 

  This move follows the successful use of sheep to help the grassland habitat at Carew Castle . 

  Development plans rejected 

  A proposal to develop an historic mill in the Peak District into a large scale tourism complex was dismissed by an inspector following a public enquiry . 

  The inspector said the conversion of Litton Mill into 55 new timeshare units would cause considerable adverse effects to the mill buildings and to the surrounding area . 

  A spokesperson for the Council for National Parks said " This gives us the clear message that conversion of derelict buildings for tourism developments in national parks should be sensitive to the quality of the environment . " 

  Question over cycle access 

  Proposed cycle access to the whole of the Taff Trail in Wales is currently being discussed by the Brecon Beacons National Park Authority . 

  The completed trail will be formally opened next July . 

  While cyclists can currently travel from Merthyr to Talybont-on-Usk using a combination of disused railway lines , forestry tracks and minor roads , the stretch between Talybont and Brecon is along an unsuitable canal towpath . 

  The only other option for cyclists is a busy B road which is unsafe for family cycling . 

  The park authority say that the upgrading of the towpath for cyclists could have an adverse effect on the landscape and ecology of the area and be in conflict with other towpath users . 

  Hang gliders cause problems 

  Hang gliders in the Bradwell Edge area of the Peak District are causing growing concern among local residents . 

  Problems include unauthorised landing of hang gliders , parking on Bradwell Edge and the surrounding villages , erosion and the effect on wildlife in the take-off areas . 

  The Peak Park Board can either take enforcement action or establish an effective management system . 

  News supplied by the Council for National Parks 

  BIRD SITES WIN SPECIAL PROTECTION 

  Four important birdlife areas in the north-west of Wales have been designated as Special Protection Areas , ( SPAs ) , by the Welsh Office . 

  The Glannau Aberdaron and Ynys Enlli SPA , including part of the coast of the Llyn Peninsula and Bardsey Island , is important for breeding Manx shearwater and choughs . 

  Anglesey SPA will protect tern colonies and Glannau Ynys Gybi SPA , on the western side of Holy Island , is important for its seabirds and choughs , while Traeth Lafan SPA on Conwy Bay is home to large numbers of wintering waders . 

  Under the European Community Wild Birds Directive SPA designation requires the Government to guarantee the area's future protection and to try to prevent damage to the habitats within it . 

  Stuart Housden of the RSPB said " We hare pleased that these areas have finally been designated , giving protection to their important birds . 

  However there are nearly 200 equally important areas around the UK which are in urgent need of protection and we look forward to more SPA designations in the near future . " 

  - Starlings , house sparrows and blue tits are the three commonest birds found in the gardens in the UK according to a survey published by the Young Ornithologists Club . 

  RIDGE WALKING 

  ridge WAYS 

  Nature's natural highways offer walkers a rollercoaster ride through some of Britain's most stunning countryside . 

  Paul Traynor picks five of the best 

  Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years' experience of walking and backpacking at home 

  Whether broad whalebacks or jagged knife-edges , ridges rarely fail to put a spring in the step . 

  In serious mountains that spring might be influenced by the thrill of being at high altitude , while in lower terrain the jauntiness of stride may reflect the rollercoaster of broad panoramas and changing perspectives . 

  Wherever you are , progress seems more worthwhile and rewarding when you feel , literally , on top of things . 

  After a long approach slog , reaching the crest of a ridge usually means you're getting somewhere at last . 

  You may have a good deal of ups and downs and hard work ahead of you , but sweating on a ridge is , in my opinion , far preferable to plodding up a hillside or toiling along a zig-zag path to a top . 

  Ridges -- in the loose sense of being high ground connecting summits -- are natural highways and the clearest and most obvious way of making upland progress . 

  Climbers' eyes tend to be drawn to the cleanest and most direct route up a rock face , while in a similar way walkers piece together peaks and ridges to create their own " direct " routes -- albeit ( usually ) on a more horizontal plane . 

  In terms of energy they're often the most effective way of getting around , maximising the return on height gained . 

  Hence the huge number of popular circuits , " rounds " and " horseshoes " awaiting those who have progressed from the straight up and down , I've climbed another one , style of peak-bagging . 

  Natural highways they may be , but while some ridges are broader than a motorway , others resemble a tricky combination of obstacle course and tightrope walk . 

  And as with tarmac highways , weekends and Bank Holidays can bring heavy traffic on the best known routes . 

  As will travelling by car there is also the risk of breakdown and accident . 

  When choosing a route consider the capabilities and limitations of all your party to ensure you do not tackle a ridge too far . 

  Peak District 

  The name " Shivering Mountain " sounds like it should refer to some awesome peak in the Himalayas -- in fact it applies to Mam Tor , standing at a modest 1,696ft but offering a first class viewpoint on this fine Derbyshire circuit . 

  The " Shivering Mountain " derives its name from being a distinctly unstable lump of land , given to landslips . 

  This susceptibility led to the closure of the main road at its base . 

  Mam Tor is the first objective on the walk along the ridge which separates the Hope and Edale valleys . 

  Castleton makes a suitable base and heading west towards the ridge , you may be tempted to pause at the Speedwell , Treak Cliff and Blue John caverns . 

  The stepped path to Mam Tor's summit , topped by an Iron Age hill fort , is an indication of the popularity of the hill -- there's also a superb view north over the Vale of Edale to the Kinder Plateau . 

  From here the ridge path dips to Hollins Cross , climbs sharply up Barker Bank , continues along Back Tor to the final ascent of Lose Hill , another splendid viewpoint , which has a summit plate listing surrounding features . 

  The path is deeply etched all the way along the ridge , but walkers need not look too guiltily at their boots -- like many others in the area , the path was formerly a packhorse route and horses are not noted for their ecological delicacy . 

  From Lose Hill , after descending the long southeastern ridge , the walker has a choice . 

  The day could be easily extended to take in another popular viewpoint top -- Win Hill to the east across the railway line . 

  Or , with the ridge proper complete , you may prefer to return to Castleton via the path which passes Losehill Farm . 

  Previous page : north-east ridge of Y Cribyn with a view westwards to northern flank of Pen y Fan , Brecon Beacons . 

  Below : ascent from Bwlch Dros-bern onto the plateau of Mynydd Tal-Y-Mignedd in Snowdonia . 

  Malvern Hills 

  It's not very high , it's nowhere near anything like mountain country , and you'd have to work pretty hard to inject risk or danger into the walk , yet the narrow , ten mile ridge of the Malvern Hills , provides a cracking day out , out of all proportion to the vital statistics . 

  The highest point is a mere 1,394ft at Worcestershire Beacon , and the ridge averages only between 950ft and 1,200ft . 

  But it's the way the hills rise so sharply from the plain between Hereford and Worcester that exaggerates their impact -- and provides sensational views . 

  On a clear day -- and they're not that uncommon -- the panoramas may take in up to 15 counties . 

  A good path follows the full length of the summit ridge , and it is most conveniently gained by starting at the spa town of Great Malvern , towards the northern end of the range . 

  North Hill is soon reached , then Worcestershire Beacon , but it is by no means all downhill from there . 

  On the undulating ridge there is a sharp descent -- through Wyche Cutting -- but this is followed by a fair climb to Herefordshire Beacon . 

  Many of those who approached the walk with a hint of condescension have been known to regret it at about this stage . 

  Further south and the hills are lower and gentler -- how far you continue is up to you . 

  There are a couple of hills beyond the A438 if you fancy , but the road is a convenient enough place to call it quits . 

  Clearly the easily accessible position of the Malverns near big population centres make them a popular target for picnickers and day trippers , not to mention walkers . 

  This being the case , summer weekends are not the best time to visit . 

  Autumn has the benefit of flaming natural colours , but an outing on a sharp winter's day , with perhaps a smattering of snow is perfect . 

  On days like this you shall only hear the sound of frost crunching , not sandwich munching . 

  Brecon Beacons 

  Ridge rovers arriving in South Wales for the first time probably have firm plans to tackle the splendid routes in the Black Mountains and , of course , the classic escarpment topped by Pen y Fan in the Brecon Beacons . 

  They'd be well advised to add a trip further west to tackle the stunning scarps of Carmarthen Fan , rising austerely above two solitary lakes . 

  Gone are the days when you were likely to be alone on the rim path , but if the five miles escarpment is included as part of a longer circuit of the vast moorland , walkers seeking solitude will find their fair share -- and a good test of their navigation skills . 

  From the A4067 , a few hundred yards north of the Dan yr Ogof show caves , you make your way , initially quite steeply , to a clear path on the rim of Fan Hir . 

  Heading along the well-trodden path a tarn , Llyn y Fan fawr , lies below , while to the east the distinctive summits of the Brecon Beacons loom . 

  From there the path falls and rises to reach the dramatic cliffs of Bannau Sir Gaer above Llyn y Fan fach . 

  Head west to reach the head of a stream , Twrch Fechan , where the idea is to pick up a right of way travelling south-east to return to the walk starting point . 

  The path is clear in places , indistinct in others . 

  This is truly wild country dotted with rocky outcrops and , even on a clear day , occasional compass checks are reassuring . 

  And in misty conditions following a bearing will prove more reliable than path traces . 

  If the thought of a lengthy moorland return is unappealing , an alternative way to get to the best of the escarpment in a shorter time is to start from a parking area near a prominent standing stone on the unclassified road to Trecastle . 

  Llyn y Fan fawr may be easily reached and from its southern end a very clear path , known as the Staircase , climbs to reach the Bwlch y Giedd pass -- the ridge is now all yours . 

  Snowdonia 

  The pull of mountains which top the magic 3,000ft mark can be hard to resist . 

  But size is not everything , as they say , and great days can be had by occasionally turning your back on the Carnedds , Glyders and Snowdon itself . 

  A superb outing of this kind can be had on the long Nantlle ridge -- comprising six miles and six mountains of excellent high-level walking . 

  If a two-car transport system cannot be set up , a double traverse should not be too taxing , leaving the car at the starting point village of Rhydd Ddu on the A4085 . 

  The day starts with a bang -- the steep climb to Y Garn ( 2,080ft ) -- after this you shall probably be glad to pause a while , enjoy the view of the day ahead and have the chance to get your breath back . 

  From there the ridge unfolds over Mynydd Drws Y Coed ( 2,281ft ) , Trum y Ddysgl ( 2,329ft ) and Mynydd Tal y Mignedd ( 2,148ft ) . 

  There are sensational drops to concentrate the mind , some straightforward scrambles to add spice and great views towards Anglesey and back over the Snowdon massif . 

  An unpleasant descent to the col Bwlch Dros Bern presents you with a somewhat intimidating view of the next summit -- Craig Cwm Silyn ( 2,408ft ) . 

  Progress looks tricky but is deceptive and you should not encounter any problems . 

  The final summit , Garnedd Goch ( 2,302ft ) , is also easily achieved . 

  Now all you have to do is retrace your steps . 

  Unstable east face of Mam Tor with view over the Hope Valley towards the pyramid of Losehill Pike in the Peak District . 

  Scotland 

  Picking a route from the walking riches of Scotland is always somewhat arbitrary -- but needs must and a traverse of the Five Sisters of Kintail will certainly pass muster as a first-rate choice . 

  Dominating Glen Shiel is the Western Highlands , the steep , shapely mountains are a popular hillwalkers' target -- a long , demanding route , worthy of some respect . 

  Altogether some 10,000ft of ascent and descent are needed , often steep , rocky and energetic , so only fit , capable and committed walkers should attempt this route . 

  A plus point is that the National Trust for Scotland own the 15,000 acres of Kintail so there are no access complications or restrictions . 

  The recommended way to tackle the Sisters is from south-east to north-west , starting near the site of the Battle of the Bridge of Shiel , a Jacobite defeat in the ill-fated rising of 1719 . 

  Spanish troops were involved , hence the name of the mountain above the site , Sgurr nan Spainteach , Peak of the Spaniards , ( 3,247ft ) . 

  This is not one of the five Sisters , but is so closely related that its inclusion makes sense . 

  The first of the Sisters proper is Sgurr na Ciste Duibhe ( 3,368ft ) , followed by Sgurr na Carnach ( 3,286ft ) . 

  Atop a steep series of zig-zags the highest and most impressive peak , Sgurr Fhuaran ( 3,503ft ) , is now reached . 

  Another steep descent leads on to grassy col and then yet more superb ridge walking , narrow and exposed , over Sgurr nan Saighead ( 3,047ft ) . 

  By now your legs should be dropping hints about their preferences and if tiredness really has set in , the last top , Sgurr na Moraich , can be avoided by descending to the glen from the final col . 

  Regardless of the shape you're in at the finish , only a glutton for punishment will relish the long haul back down the road to the car . 

  Wastwater -- a lake not to be missed . 

  WALKING THE LAKES 

  Lakeland Circuit 

  In this second of his circuit around the Lake District , Paul Buttle outlines a further three days of great walking . 

  The circuit takes 12 days in total and can be walked in sections of two days or more , on high or low level alternative routes . 

  DAY 5 

  BUTTERMERE TO ENNERDALE ( optional ) 

  The main route follows another classic ridge walk across the Buttermere Fells , Red Pike , High Stile and High Crag where there are impressive views over Buttermere . 

  After High Crag there is a steep , badly eroded descent to Scarth Gap from where it would be easy enough to descend down into Ennerdale . 

  However this would make the day rather short . 

  You should have enough energy to ascend from Scarth Gap onto Haystacks which is a jumble of rocky knolls , tarns and heather , so loved by Wainwright -- in fact it is here that his ashes are now scattered . 

  A mile to the south-east of the summit another path leads down to Ennerdale along the side of Loft Beck . 

  However , you should have enough energy left to include Lakeland's noblest summit in this day's walk -- Great Gable ( 1.5 miles ) . 

  This would nicely round off a particularly satisfying day of sustained high level fell walking . 

  Main Route 

  Distance : 10 miles 

  Highest point : Great Gable 2,949ft . 

  Total ascent : 4,200ft . 

  Maps : OS Landranger sheet 89 , Outdoor Leisure 4 , Tourist Map 3 . 

  Starting point : Buttermere . 

  ( NY 176 169 ) . 

  Public transport : bus service from Penrith Railway Station to Keswick ( number 104 ) and from Windermere Railway Station to Keswick ( number 555 ) . 

  All services operated by Cumberland Motor Services . . 

  Minibus from Keswick to Buttermere . 

  Runs from Spring Bank Holiday to September , operated by Mountain Goat . . 

  Walk Directions 

  Beginning from Buttermere , follow the path to Scale Force ( 2 miles ) , a deeply recessed waterfall which , at 172ft , is the summit of Red Pike ( 1.5 miles ) is quieter and not as steep as the more popular ascent via Bleaberry Tarn . 

  And it passes through more unusual heather covered terrain , giving an added contrast to the walk . 

  From Red Pike follow the ridge to High Stile ( 0.75 miles ) where it is worth wandering a little northwards along the summit spur to get the best views of Buttermere . 

  From High Stile move n to High Crag ( 0.75 miles ) then descend to Scarth Gap ( 0.75 miles ) . 

  This is a very eroded descent but unfortunately there is not way of avoiding it . 

  From Scarth Gap ascend up Haystacks ( 0.25 miles ) and once you've reached the top , navigate south-westwards towards Gillercomb Head ( 2 miles ) , the gap between Brandreth and Green Gable . 

  As you near the gap branch off to the top of Green Gable ( 0.5 miles ) . 

  There is actually a thin path to the summit although it is not indicated on the OS maps and in mist would be difficult to locate . 

  From Green Gable move on the Great Gable ( 0.5 miles in a south-westerly direction ) and from the summit of Great Gable descend north-westwards to Beck Head ( 0.5 miles ) , the gap between Gable and Kirk Fell . 

  From here descend into Ennerdale ( 1.25 miles ) . 

  There is no path until you reach the River Liza but the ground is easy to descend . 

  Escape Routes 

  Red Pike to Gillerthwaite ( 1.25 miles ) , Scarth Gap to Black Sail Hut ( 0.75 miles ) , the head of Loft Beck to Black Sail Hut ( 1 mile ) and Windy Gap to Black Sail Hut ( 1.5 miles ) . 

  Low Level Route 

  Distance : 3.5 miles 

  Highest point : 1,500ft . 

  Total ascent : 1,200ft . 

  Simply cross over Scarth Gap from Buttermere using the old packhorse route . 

  As this is such a short route it is best to combine it with Days Four or Six . 

  If you are booked in to Black Sail Hut Youth Hostel and the weather puts you off completing the main route , you can make a circuit around Crummock Water before crossing Scarth Gap . 

  Accommodation : 

  Bothy : a wooden shed provided by the Forestry Commission . 

  It is open to the general public as a refuge . 

  ( NY 193 121 ) . 

  Youth hostel : Black Sail Hut , . 

  Small , simple , cosy and extremely popular . 

  Shops : none 

  Pubs and eating places : none . 

  Public transport : nearest point Seatoller . 

  Bus service from Seatoller to Keswick ( number 79 ) , Keswick to Penrith Railway Station ( number 104 ) and Keswick to Windermere Railway Station ( number 555 ) . 

  Operator : Cumberland Motor Services . 

  DAY 6 

  ENNERDALE TO ESKDALE 

  The main route on this day's walk is via the most exciting mile of path in the Lake District -- the High Level Route on Pillar . 

  This is principally a path following a narrow undulating ledge which runs across the northern face of Pillar . 

  The path was developed by an early rock climbing pioneer called John Wilson Robinson as a way of reaching Pillar Rock . 

  This rock was and still is a major climbing crag . 

  On a prominent knoll near the end of the path is a distinctive cairn built in Robinson's memory . 

  It also has a beautifully worded copper plaque . 

  It is from this cairn that you gain your close hand view of Pillar Rock . 

  The ascent from here to the summit looks fairly fearsome but it is not as bad as it seems . 

  It involves scrambling up a scree slope and then walking along a ledge called the Shamrock Traverse , before making a direct ascent up to the top . 

  Main Route 

  Distance : 12.5 miles . 

  Highest point : Pillar 2,927 ft . 

  Total ascent : 3,300 . 

  Maps : OS Landranger Sheet 89 , Outdoor Leisure 4 &amp;amp; 6 , Tourist Map 3 . 

  Starting point : Black Sail Hut . 

  ( NY 195 124 ) . 

  Public transport : nearest point Seatoller . 

  Buses : Penrith Railway Station to Keswick ( Number 104 ) . 

  Windermere Railway Station to Keswick ( Number 555 ) . 

  Keswick to Seatoller ( Number 79 ) . 

  Operator : Cumberland Motor Services . . 

  Walk Directions 

  From Black Sail Hut climb ( 0.75 miles ) to the top of the pass ( southwards ) after which it is named . 

  From there move west to Looking Stead ( 0.5 miles ) . 

  After Looking Stead begin climbing the shoulder of Pillar , and look for two cairns placed either side of the path . 

  Imperceptibly leading away to the right from the right hand cairn is the High Level Route , but if it all looks too daunting simply ascend Pillar by keeping to the ridge ( 1 mile ) . 

  From the summit of Pillar continue ( south westwards ) to Scoat Fell ( 0.75 miles ) and then ( south eastwards ) to Red Pike ( 0.75 miles ) before heading in the same direction to Dore Head ( 0.75 miles ) -- the gap between Red Pike and Yewbarrow . 

  From here descend ( south westwards ) to Wastwater ( 2 miles ) following the course of Over Back before following the lakeshore road to the head of the lake ( 1 mile ) . 

  From the head of the lake the day's walking finishes by crossing southwards over Burnmoor to Eskdale ( 4.5 miles ) . 

  This wide open moorland with spacious views all around stands in stark contrast to the terrain on the rest of the circuit and provides a gentle descent to an especially idyllic lakeland valley . 

  Escape Routes 

  Wind Gap to Mosedale ( 1 mile ) -- a long steep descent . 

  From Dore Head to Mosedale ( 0.5 mile ) . 

  This used to be a wonderful scree running down to Mosedale , which was like gliding down an escalator . 

  But the " lubricity " , if that's the right word , of the scree has now gone for over use . 

  Low Level Route 

  Distance : 8 miles . 

  Highest Point : 1,800ft . 

  Total ascent : 1,600 ft . 

  Cross over Black Sail Pass down into Mosedale ( 2 miles ) and on to Wasdale Head ( 1 mile southwards ) . 

  Then link onto the path crossing Burnmoor to reach Eskdale ( 5.5 miles ) . 

  On this route you will be able to visit the Wasdale Head Inn , a once favourite haunt of rock climbers . 

  Now the inn is more geared to motorists , who much to their surprise , find the road terminates at the door of the inn rather than continuing to Windermere . 

  Just a few yards north of the inn is a farm that serves teas in the summer . 

  Accommodation 

  Pubs and eating places : 

  The Burnmoor Inn and the Woolpack Inn mentioned above both serve bar meals . 

  Public Transport : the Eskdale Railway , Dalegarth to Ravenglass main line BR Railway Station . 

  Enquiries . 

  DAY 7 

  ESKDALE TO BORROWDALE 

  Today's main route follows what in my view is the best route of ascent in the Lake District , and appropriately enough , it is to the top of Scafell Pike , England's highest peak . 

  In both senses of the word then , today's walk should be the high point of the circuit passing through the wildest landscape in the Lake District . 

  The route concludes with a descent into Borrowdale which is often claimed to be the most beautiful valley in the whole of England . 

  Main Route 

  Distance : 11 miles . 

  Highest point : 3,206ft . 

  Total ascent : 3,200ft . 

  Maps : OS sheet 89 , Outdoor Leisure 4 &amp;amp; 6 , Tourist Map 3 . 

  Starting point : Brotherilkeld Farm ( NY 213 014 ) . 

  Public transport : The Eskdale Railway . 

  Raven glass main line BR Railway Station to Dalegarth . . 

  Walk Directions 

  From Brotherilkeld Farm simply follow the eastern side of the River Esk until you reach an area called Great Moss ( 3 miles ) . 

  Here you need to ford the River Esk -- it's normally only inches deep -- and head for a waterfall , Cam Spout ( north , 0.5 mile ) . 

  I have never had any difficulty crossing it here but if you are walking in , or just after , a deluge of rain it mist be better to avoid the area by following the path along the western side of the river . 

  This starts from Taw House Farm which you can reach from Brotherilkeld Farm by crossing the footbridge over the River Esk between the two farms . 

  From Cam Spout follow a path which climbs steeply uphill to Mickledore ( 0.75 miles ) -- a narrow red coloured ridge connecting Scafell to Scafell Pike . 

  From here walk along a distinct path leading to the summit of Scafell Pike ( 0.75 miles ) . 

  Another distinct path leads north-westwards from the summit across the highest ridge in England -- a stone-strewn crest including Broad Crag , Ill Crag and Great End . 

  Before reaching Great End however , follow the main path which veers to the right , down to a broad elevated col called Esk Hause ( 1.25 miles ) . 

  Now head northwards into Grains Gill and into Borrowdale ( 4.5 miles ) . 

  Escape Route 

  The Corridor Route , from the summit of Scafell Pike to Seathwaite Farm via Sty Head Tarn ( 4 miles ) . 

  Low Level Route 

  Distance : 10 Miles 

  Highest Point : 2,490 ft . 

  Total ascent : 2,300 ft . 

  This is the same as the main route until you come to the Great Moss area , but where you cross over the River Esk , continue to follow the river to its source at Esk Hause , where you rejoin the main route . 

  This is nearly as demanding as the main route so I'd only do it if the tops are covered in mist or you are absolutely worn out . 

  Accommodation 

  Pubs and eating places : 

  The Scafell Hotel ( above ) has a public bar with bar meals . 

  Yew Tree Country Restaurant , Seatoller , ( NY 244 137 ) . 

  . Very upmarket . 

  Public transport : bus service from Seatoller to Keswick via Rosthwaite ( number 79 ) , from Keswick to Penrith Railway Station ( number 104 ) and from Keswick to Windermere Railway Station ( number 555 ) . 

  Operator : Cumberland Motor Services . . 

  SEPTEMBER ISSUE Borrowdale to Staveley via Dunnerdale , Elterwater , Grasmere and Hartsop 

  Ennerdale -- one of the many highlights of Day 5 of this special route 

  GEAR TEST 

  GEODESIC DOME TENTS 

  Geodesic domes are stable , roomy and light -- ideal for high and low level camps . 

  Dave Weatherley tests six of the leading designs 

  Dave Weatherley has been involved in the outdoors all his life . 

  He is a qualified mountain leader and runs an activity centre in the Lakes 

  Geodesic dome tents make the ideal all-round home from home . 

  If you want to camp throughout the year and want the option of taking your tent into the mountains as well as camping at low levels , then these are the designs you should be looking at . 

  The crossed poles structure gives the stability you need to cope with high winds , together with a good space to weight ration . 

  The typically inner shape is high and wide so you can at the least sit up comfortably -- in some of the models you can just about stand . 

  We tested six tents over a period of three months in weather ranging from sunshine to horizontal rain . 

  JACK WOLFSKIN MONTANA 

  Designated use : three person tent for year-round use . 

  Pitching : easy -- the inner goes up first in around four minutes . 

  Once the poles are secured the inner is a self-supporting dome . 

  The outer is then draped over and clipped to the base of inner . 

  From start to finish pitching takes around nine minutes . 

  Poles : four shockcorded alloy poles , all the same size . 

  The poles pass through the split sleeves and are secured in eyelets on the sides of the inner . 

  The sleeves are colour coded for easy identification . 

  Inner fabric : 70D nylon taffeta . 

  Inner : one of the best inners I've seen for a long time . 

  A self-supporting dome with plenty of height -- you could lose an army inside . 

  Three internal pockets . 

  Flysheet fabric : 75D proofed polyester . 

  UV resistant . 

  Flysheet : has an interesting feature which allows you to quickly attach the fly to the inner by means of quick release buckles -- an efficient method . 

  I thought the flysheet looked too short and I worried that rain would get into the inner . 

  However the groundsheet sides curve up well and my worries proved unfounded . 

  Groundsheet : 75D proofed polyester . 

  Bellends : rather small for large quantities of gear but adequate for two people . 

  Two sacks and boots can be stored in one end , while you can shelter in the other end to cook . 

  There is only one zip , positioned on the side at either end , so door options are limited to side entry only . 

  Condensation : the first time I used the tent was a still moonlit evening . 

  The dew in the atmosphere had condensed on the outside of the fly . 

  This remained until sunrise . 

  The level of condensation under the fly was minimal . 

  On other days I found condensation levels were low or non-existent . 

  Waterproofness : no problems , even in driving rain . 

  Guylines : four external guylines with 10 ground pegging out points . 

  Stability : for such a large tent , its stability was good with all the guys pegged out . 

  Although the sides of the flysheet moved in high winds I never felt for one minute it would take off . 

  Ventilation : mesh ventilation windows under the flysheet storm flap help prevent a build up of too much condensation . 

  Mosquito netting : both inner doors are fully protected by netting which zips up independently from the door flap . 

  Weight : 10lb . 

  Packed size : 22i x 8i . 

  Zips : all the zips run freely on both the fly and the inner . 

  Seams : all flysheet seams are fully taped and sealed . 

  Colours : green . 

  Price : 299.95 . 

  Dave's verdict : the internal space and design of the inner is exceptional but I am afraid the design of the flysheet does spoil the line of the tent . 

  If it were slightly longer at the sides and the bellends were larger to accommodate more gear this would be one of the best geodesic tents around . 

  The price is very fair . 

  Contact : , , . 

  LICHFIELD SKOMER 

  Designated use : two to three person tent for all season use . 

  Pitching : the flysheet is erected first and took a little longer than I expected to up on my own -- six minutes . 

  The inner is then attached easily in just two minutes . 

  It is possible to keep the fly and inner joined and erect the tent all in one . 

  However , there is little time advantage to be gained from doing this . 

  Poles : four ( thicker than usual ) shockcorded alloy poles . 

  They are all the same length . 

  Inner fabric : nylon . 

  Inner : the inner is easily suspended from the fly by using a hook and eyelet system . 

  The space inside is good , with decent headroom The tent is ideal for two but as the manufacturers say , is capable of sleeping three . 

  Flysheet fabric : proofed nylon . 

  Flysheet : a well designed hexagonal flysheet . 

  Four poles are inserted into external sleeves and placed into their respective eyelets at ground level so the flysheet becomes a free standing structure . 

  Groundsheet : pu coated polyethylene . 

  Bellends : on the door there's a curved L-shaped one way zip . 

  Unfortunately , this is the only entrance . 

  You can crouch in the small bell section with the fly door closed and there's a small amount of space between the fly and the inner to stow boots and small items . 

  Condensation : surprisingly little when I used it . 

  Waterproofness : this tent was used as a base camp for ten days and experienced all sorts of weather conditions . 

  The proofed nylon flysheet is totally waterproof and does not leak around the seams . 

  However some water got in at the front . 

  It turned out to have come in through the curved zip which is unprotected by a weather flap . 

  Rain water had slowly seeped through the top section and dropped onto the inner . 

  However , this seepage was slight and not a problem . 

  Guylines : six external guylines with non-slip adjusters . 

  Six pegging rings by each pole and five elastic tension points on each of the panels . 

  Stability : I used the tent at low level and was duly impressed . 

  Ventilation : a small mesh net at the rear of the inner . 

  As the fly just touches the ground , air circulation from under this area is limited , though there is plenty of room for air to circulate between the fly and the inner . 

  Mosquito netting : none . 

  Weight : 10lb 4oz . 

  Packed size : 26i x 8i . 

  Zips : one curved L-shaped zip on the flysheet and three zips on the inner door . 

  All of the zips run freely . 

  Seams : almost a " no seam " flysheet -- each of the six side panels of the flysheet are sewn onto the pole sleeves , making an integral join . 

  Colours : two tone green . 

  Price : 192.50 . 

  Dave's verdict : certainly not a technical tent with high tech fabrics , but a great tent for someone who wants a reasonably priced geodesic dome with good internal space for campsite camping . 

  Contact : , , . 

  Once geodesic dome tents are erected they can be moved in one piece 

  NORTH FACE VE25 

  Designated use : suitable for base and high level camps . 

  Capable of sleeping between two and four people . 

  Pitching : on one wild and windy night it took just five minutes to put up the inner . 

  It then took another five minutes to fit the flysheet and peg it out . 

  It's twice as quick to erect with two people working together . 

  Poles : four black shock-corded poles are inserted into colour-coded sleeves . 

  The base of each pole is then inserted into brass eyelets on nylon webbing which are then attached to the groundsheet . 

  A small arched pole supports the porch . 

  Inner fabric : ripstop nylon , coated with Scotchguard to help prevent the fabric from absorbing water . 

  Inner : spacious inner with a good amount of height which makes a free standing dome before the fly is fitted . 

  Four internal pockets . 

  Flysheet fabric : ripstop nylon with silicon elastomer coating which waterproofs both sides of the fabric and makes it more tear resistant . 

  Flysheet : once the flysheet is draped over the inner it fixes onto the poles at ground level so both inner and fly are attached to the poles . 

  I like this -- in high winds there's no chance of the flysheet flapping around or flying over the tent . 

  Groundsheet : pu coated taffeta nylon . 

  Bellends : entrances at both ends . 

  The back fly entrance has a single zip , giving a small bellend space to store boots and a couple of rucksacks . 

  The front porch has various door openings with room to shelter when cooking and to store gear . 

  Condensation : condensation was average -- a light film on the inside of the flysheet but no droplets . 

  Waterproofness : the flysheet gave excellent protection from rain . 

  No evidence of water -- other than condensation -- was seen under the fly . 

  Guylines : six external guys with 14 pegging points . 

  Stability : this is a rock solid tent which stands rigid against strong winds . 

  With all the external guys pegged out it hardly moves in the wind . 

  Ventilation : although internal space is large , ventilation to the inner is only achieved by opening the doors a little at either end . 

  Mosquito netting : both doors have mosquito nets which unzip independently of the door flaps . 

  Weight : 9lb 12 oz . 

  Packed size : 28i x 8i . 

  Zips : all zips run freely . 

  The flysheet zips are protected with a weather flap . 

  Seams : double stitched , untaped . 

  Colours : yellow/ blue . 

  Price : 500 . 

  Dave's verdict : a strong well made tent which performs just as well high in the mountains or at lower levels . 

  Although it has a high price , this is a top quality tent . 

  Contact : , , 

  VANGO ODYSSEY 300 

  Designated use : a two person tent for year round use . 

  Pitching : the inner is erected in about four minutes and goes up first . 

  The poles are quickly inserted along the inner sleeves and placed into their respective eyelets on the edge of the groundsheet . 

  This is now a self supporting unit . 

  The flysheet is then draped over the inner and secured to ground . 

  The whole thing takes eight-ten minutes . 

  Poles : five alloy poles of which four are used for the inner . 

  The fifth pole is used in the bellend of the flysheet . 

  The fly pole is only a little shorter than two of the smaller inner tent poles , so unless you identify this it can be confusing in the dark . 

  Inner fabric : ripstop nylon . 

  Inner : ideal for two . 

  It's long and spacious too , which is good for extra-tall campers . 

  Flysheet fabric : ripstop nylon . 

  Flysheet : the fly is easily draped over the inner . 

  A small pole which extends the porch can be inserted at any stage . 

  However , if the winds are strong it is better left till last until the flysheet is pegged out . 

  Groundsheet : pu coated nylon . 

  Bellends : two bellends . 

  The back is a more traditional sloping bellend with enough space for two large rucksacks as well as boots . 

  The front bellend uses an extra hooped pole which extends the flysheet forward giving ample room for storage . 

  Access in and out is good at both ends . 

  Condensation : normal levels -- a light film on the inside of the fly but no droplets . 

  Waterproofness : no problems in various weather conditions . 

  Guylines : five external guylines and 12 ground pegging points , all attached to the fly . 

  Stability : this is a well designed , aerodynamic tent with excellent stability in strong winds when all the guylines are pegged out . 

  Ventilation : large triangular mesh netting in the roof of the inner adds to internal ventilation when both doors are fully zipped up . 

  Mosquito netting : there are nets at both ends which zip separately from the door flap . 

  Weight : 9lb 7oz . 

  Packed size : 26i x 8i . 

  Zips : all zips are free running . 

  The flysheet zips are protected by a small weather flap . 

  Seams : fully taped . 

  Colours : purple fly/ yellow inner . 

  Price : 259 . 

  Dave's verdict : an ideal tent for two people to take on backpacking trips , and for use on static camps . 

  With good storage and stability this tent is excellent value for money . 

  Contact : , , . 

  WILD COUNTRY QUASAR 

  Designated use : two person tent for high and low level use . 

  Pitching : a fairly standard geodesic shape which is easy to erect . 

  The inner goes up first and takes just four minutes to put up . 

  The poles are inserted into continuous sleeves . 

  It only takes a couple of minutes before the flysheet is in place . 

  Poles : Four allow poles -- two poles cross at the apex of the tent with two slightly shorter poles supporting each end . 

  Once through their sleeves the poles are inserted into small eyelets which are attached to the edge of the groundsheet . 

  Inner fabric : ripstop nylon . 

  Inner : once erected the inner is a free standing unit . 

  It has good height along the entire length . 

  Two people do not get in each other's way . 

  Flysheet fabric : proofed ripstop nylon . 

  Flysheet : the flysheet has eyelets at its base which , once it is draped over the inner , fix onto the poles at ground level so that both inner and fly are attached to the poles . 

  Groundsheet : pu coated strong nylon . 

  Bellends : I liked the fact that as both ends are the same you have four choices of entrance . 

  The double zip allows you to roll the centre flap up from the bottom , to be fastened at the top or rolled down from the top for quick access . 

  Each side panel can also be gathered in to be used as a doorway . 

  Condensation : low or non-existent condensation levels in warm weather . 

  Normal levels in colder conditions -- a light film on the inside of the fly but no droplets . 

  Waterproofness : groundsheet and fly are totally watertight . 

  Guylines : there are ten strong bungy cords at ground level with two external guys . 

  Stability : if well pegged to the ground tent is unmoveable . 

  Its aerodynamic shape means that wind is funnelled round its surface causing little movement to the structure . 

  Ventilation : because the fly sits on top of the inner there's little space for air to circulate in this area . 

  Ventilation to the inner can be achieved by opening doors . 

  Mosquito netting : the nets are at both ends of the tent can be zipped independently of the door flap . 

  Weight : 8lb 8oz . 

  Packed size : 24i x 8i . 

  Zips : all zips run freely and are protected on the flysheet by a weather flap . 

  Seams : fully taped . 

  Colours : yellow/ grey . 

  Price : 356 . 

  Dave's verdict : I like this tent very much , there's lots of room for two and its aerodynamic shape is well suited for high winds . 

  Its weight to space ratio is excellent . 

  Contact : , , 

  PHOENIX PHREEDOME 3000 

  Designated use : two to three person tent for use in high mountains or general camping . 

  Pitching : there are two methods of putting the tent up -- either flysheet first , or you can leave the inner attached and put it up all in one . 

  The fly is large , and took eight minutes to erect on my own but just five minutes with a friend . 

  It then takes a further two minutes to suspend the inner under the fly . 

  Poles : five shockcorded alloy poles . 

  Two long poles which cross as the apex and two shorter , hooped poles which provide height and stability to the ends . 

  A short 20i pole at the apex gives a little more width to the tent . 

  Inner fabric : ripstop nylon . 

  Inner : the inner is symmetrical -- so it does not matter which way you hook it in place . 

  It's fixed under the flysheet with a combination of ten elastic cords and hooks . 

  The fabric does tend to flop down though , which restricts space . 

  Headroom is good along the length of the tent . 

  It also has four mesh pockets and a roof strap . 

  Flysheet fabric : pu coated nylon with UV inhibitors . 

  Flysheet : the fly is large and protects the inner well . 

  Poles are inserted into continuous sleeves sewn to the top of the fly . 

  Groundsheet : neoprene coated nylon . 

  Bellends : extended porches with a single hooped pole at both ends . 

  The front has a central panel with parallel two-way zips which allow for front and side entry . 

  There is one zip at the rear . 

  Both areas are huge and good for storing gear or for shelter when cooking . 

  Condensation : a little during morning and evening but nothing too serious . 

  Waterproofness : no leaks even during heavy downpours . 

  Guylines : six bungy ground guys and 12 external guylines . 

  Stability : extremely good . 

  Ventilation : ample room between inner and flysheet for air to circulate , especially when doors at either end are open . 

  Mosquito netting : inner door flaps can be unzipped independently from the net . 

  Weight : 9lb . 

  Packed size : 20i x 8i . 

  Zips : all zips run very freely . 

  Seams : all seams are taped . 

  Colours : brown/ yellow . 

  360 

  Dave's verdict : having two large bellends is a great advantage . 

  This is a very stable tent with ample room . 

  Contact : , , . 

  TENT TIPS 

  1 . 

  Practise putting your tent up in the garden several times . 

  Do it in daylight , in the dark , when it's raining and in windy conditions . 

  2 . 

  Seal all tent seams with seam sealer . 

  3 . 

  If you're basing yourself at one campsite place an old groundsheet or plastic sheet under the tent . 

  This prolongs the life of the tent's built-in groundsheet . 

  4 . 

  When pitching in strong winds place the tent on the ground with the entrance you shall be using pointing away from the wind . 

  Peg out the four corners . 

  The tent will then be held to the ground while you insert the poles and erect the tent . 

  5 . 

  Take a repair kit with you -- a length of cord to repair guys , poles or broken webbing straps and masking tape for patching up rips . 

  JOURNEY OF A LIFETIME 

  Rock Legend 

  The Grand Canyon is the stuff of dreams -- the largest river valley on earth . 

  Chris Buckley goes exploring 

  Outside in the darkness I shake the insects out of my sleeping bag and put my boots on . 

  I fumble around for the rest of my kit and fall over Shelagh , who is shining a torch gingerly in one of her boots . 

  " I am sure I saw something move in there . " 

  It would not surprise me . 

  It's 3am and the night is alive with clicking , whirring and flying things . 

  As we set off we catch some of them in the beams of our head torches , along with the bats which are madly pursuing them . 

  The insects are out and about for the same reason as us , moving at night to beat the midday heat at the very centre of the Grand Canyon . 

  Main : flat table lands with steep edges help create a Gothic fantasy landscape . 

  Small : flowering cacti in Bright Angel Canyon . 

  We're about to begin the long hike out to the rim . 

  Above us the sky is beginning to turn from black to purple , and the walls of the canyon are faintly visible as immense dark shapes looming overhead . 

  They seem to have no colour , although yesterday afternoon's image is still strong -- the canyon glowing deep red in reflected light from the walls , the interior an inferno in the midday sun . 

  After three days in the Grand Canyon I was only just starting to appreciate the size and scale of the place . 

  It's the largest river valley on earth -- cut by the Colorado river in a vast plateau in the American south-west . 

  The river has been cutting downwards for five million years and more , and in that time it has laid bare rocks spanning half of the earth's history . 

  It's not a single canyon but rather a branching series of gorges covering a large tract of land . 

  One of the odd features when you first arrive in the area is that there is no advance warning of what's to come -- nothing visible of the Grand Canyon until you are right on the edge . 

  Once there , everything comes to a stop with 20 miles of open space ahead . 

  Below is a Gothic fantasy of plunging gorges and isolated mesas -- flat tablelands with steep edges -- all in paintbox colours . 

  From the North Rim , the Colorado river at the centre is invisible , still more than 12 miles away and nearly a mile down . 

  Few people get to walk in the Grand Canyon , though hundreds of thousands visit the area each year . 

  For those who do venture in , the rewards are outstanding . 

  We chose the North Rim as the starting point for our hike , mainly because it's a great place to camp and to recuperate . 

  The North and South Rims have very different characters . 

  The South is the classic day-tripper stop on the edge of the desert . 

  The North Rim is cooler and higher , at around 8,200f . 

  It's something of a shock after the deserts of Utah and Arizona to be greeted by Canadian-style pine forests and snow showers in early June . 

  The North gets snowed-in in winter , and the roads are often completely impassable from November until mid-May , while the South Rim is usually accessible all year round . 

  To see the Grand Canyon it is first essential to obtain an overnight camping permit . 

  The system operated by the park authorities to limit numbers into the Canyon can be tiresome and bureaucratic , although it helps to retain the essential peace , solitude and ecology of the area . 

  Well organised folks can book a permit to camp up to a year in advance , but we managed to get in despite having no permit when we arrived . 

  The key is to be prepared to wait a day or two if necessary , which is no bad thing as the North Rim is a beautiful spot in its own right . 

  Arriving at the park office early in the morning things looked grim at first . 

  We were greeted by unnaturally cheerful ranger , who told us that there were 56 people on the list ahead of us so we did not stand a chance and that it would probably rain anyway . 

  I think he was employed by the park authorities to scare away all but the most committed . 

  He must have succeeded since by the end of the next day we'd moved up to fifth place , and we got our permit to camp for two nights by the Colorado . 

  It did not rain either . 

  We planned a three-day trip following the North Kaibab Trail to the Colorado river . 

  We carried a tent since the forecast was mixed but many walkers carry only sleeping bags and mats in summer . 

  There are three types of trails in the Grand Canyon -- maintained , where there's a good path , semi-maintained where there may be a path , and unmaintained where you need a compass . 

  North Kaibab is a maintained trail which begins on a series of steep switchbacks , plunging down the side of Roaring Springs Canyon , a tributary of Bright Angel Canyon , which in turn leads to the Colorado . 

  The trail loses height at an amazing pace , then hugs the side of a steep cliff along the side of Roaring Springs Canyon . 

  The horizontal rock strata create a vast , stepped geology exhibit . 

  The harder rocks stand out as ledges , the softer ones form steep slopes . 

  After half an hour's walking the Age of Dinosaurs had come and gone , and by midday we were deep into the Palaeozoic . 

  Along the side of Roaring Springs Canyon the path hugs a ledge of pink sandstone , giving airy views into the rocky chasm below . 

  Roaring Springs at the junction of Bright Angel Canyon , is like a last oasis before entering the desert . 

  There's a waterfall and a stream which looks fantastic . 

  Below Roaring Springs the real desert starts . 

  Junction of Roaring Springs and Bright Angel Canyons , where the real desert starts 

  In Bright Angel the heat is intense and cacti with red and yellow flowers grow along the sides of the trail among great sheared-off blocks of stone . 

  Rattlesnakes are supposed to be common , though they are generally shy and silent and we did not see any trace of them . 

  At the end of Bright Angel Canyon -- and a long day's walking -- is the central canyon and finally the Colorado river -- wide , green , fast flowing , and icy cold . 

  By now we had crossed through half a dozen vegetation zones -- the botanical equivalent of a journey from Canada to New Mexico . 

  Down here we were in a true desert . 

  At the bottom of the Grand Canyon the oldest rocks of all are exposed in a gorge lined with vertical cliffs . 

  The Colorado , a buzzing chainsaw of a river , still cuts downwards , scouring the riverbed with rocks and pebbles . 

  Above , layer upon layer of cliffs rise until the colours are lost in blue and purple . 

  We made camp in a grove of cottonwood trees , about the only available protection from the sun . 

  We hung our packs on strings to stop ravenous rodents from getting to the apples and packet mixes . 

  We did not escape entirely however -- Grand Canyon animals are not fussy and they were happy to eat my sunblock cream . 

  The following day we set off to walk the Clear Creek trail which winds along the Colorado river , following a high gritstone outcrop about 1,640f above it . 

  This is real wilderness -- we met no-one else in a day's walking . 

  On the other side of the trail is a series of vast mesas , cut off from each other like islands . 

  The final return trip was a substantial hike , involving a climb of nearly 6,500f in a day . 

  But the reward for setting off early is the sight of dawn breaking over the South Rim and spilling into the Canyon . 

  After twisting our way up the long trail we finally reached the North Rim just after midday , feeling like redeemed souls struggling out of a magnificent inferno . 

  FACT FILE 

  Chris Buckley travelled independently to America . 

  The closest starting point for a trip to the Grand Canyon is Las Vegas , though Los Angeles at about a day's drive away has more choice of low-cost fares . 

  Car hire in the US is virtually essential , but thankfully cheap compared with Europe . 

  Public transport is as elusive as the wildlife and not recommended , besides which the USA is geared to the motorist above all others . 

  Trek America offer a 10 day Canyon Adventure trip for 431 , excluding flights . 

  The holiday includes walking , horse riding and mountain biking in the area . . 

  COMPETITION 

  1,000 OF PHOENIX GEAR TO WIN 

  FIRST PRIZE 

  Our lucky prize winner will soon be able to camp out in comfort and style with a brand new top quality tent from Phoenix . 

  Weighing in at only 4lb 13oz , the two person Phreeranger EB ( extended bell ) is ideal for backpackers who like to travel light . 

  It packs down to a handy 52cm x 17cm , has a taped ripstop nylon fly -- PU coated -- and cost 250 . 

  SECOND PRIZE 

  Second prize is the Phreak -- an ideal two person tent for the novice backpacker . 

  It comes in a traditional " A " pole design with lots of storage space and a rear zipped bellend . 

  It weighs 6lb 11oz and is worth 230 . 

  THIRD PRIZE 

  Our third prize winner will keep the elements at bay with this waterproof jacket with plenty of useful features . 

  Costing 225 , the Kishtwar jacket is made from Gore-Tex fabric and comes with three zipped external pockets , a two-way front zip and Velcro cuffs . 

  FOURTH PRIZE 

  A stylish smock-style fleece jacket worth 120 will soon be keeping our fourth prize winner warn . 

  The Hercules features a Windstopper lined snap neck , two zipped waist pockets and stylish embroidery on the back and front . 

  It comes in assorted colourways and sizes s-xl . 

  FIFTH PRIZE 

  Three fifth prize winners will each receive a Mist fleece jacket , worth 60 . 

  The jacket is in a smock style and has two zipped pockets and a snap neck closure . 

  Colours and sizes are the same as for the Hercules . 

  HOW TO ENTER 

  To try to win one of these fantastic prizes just answer the three questions . 

  Answers can be found in this edition of Outdoor Action . 

  Write your answers on the back of a postcard or envelope no bigger than 5i x i and send it to , . 

  Closing date Friday August 28 , 1992 . 

  QUESTIONS 

  1 . 

  How high is Y Garn on Nantlle ridge ? 

  2 . 

  At what wind speed does it become unsafe for novice paraglider pilots to fly ? 

  3 . 

  How large is the site of the Sirhowy Valley Country Park in Wales ? 

  RULES 

  1 . 

  Entries must be on the back of a postcard or envelope no bigger than 5in x 6in . 

  2 . 

  Entries are limited to one per person . 

  3 . 

  No cash alternatives will be offered . 

  4 . 

  The judge's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into . 

  5 . 

  Employees of Hawker Consumer Publications and Phoenix Mountaineering Ltd and their relatives are ineligible to enter . 

  6 . 

  No entry will be accepted after last post on Friday August 28 , 1992 . 

  WALKING IN WALES 

  Changing Pace 

  Remnants of Wales' rich industrial past make for a fascinating walk in the Sirhowy Valley . 

  Paul Traynor reports 

  For generations the people of industrial South Wales took to the uplands separating the Valleys for fresh air and recreation . 

  A walk on " the mountain " -- more accurately broad , windswept moorlands with a coal tip or three for good measure -- was a welcome escape from the terraces , mines and factories on the valley floor . 

  Times have changed , and with the rapid disappearance of the pits and much of the heavy industry , at least one welcome side-effect has come about -- the gradual cleaning up of the Valleys themselves . 

  To hope for a return to how they must have looked before mine shafts and blast furnaces -- one of the most strikingly attractive regions in Britain -- is too much to expect . 

  But there are now many places where the wooded , steep-sided landscape gives us a reminder of past beauty -- and some fine walking . 

  Add to that a history as rich and compelling as that of any in the country and the possibilities for excursions with a difference take shape . 

  An excellent example of such a walk has been developed and waymarked by councils in the eastern county of Gwent -- a move which in itself is a sign of changed official attitudes and priorities . 

  And if any readers are quietly asking themselves " Why walk in an old industrial area ? " , think again . 

  Many of our most popular and spectacular landscapes have industrial pasts which today's visitors would find hard to believe . 

  Within a few hours drive of Gwent , for instance , lie some fascinating areas -- the Forest of Dean , formerly a major coal-producing area ; Snowdonia , where the evidence of centuries of quarrying and mineral extraction is heaped everywhere ; Pembrokeshire , where pretty fishing villages once exported coal , and Cornwall where mining was once a much bigger earner than cream teas . 

  To return to Gwent , the Sirhowy Valley Walk connects the towns of Newport on the Bristol Channel and Tredegar at the head of the Valley -- 26 miles which encompass a quite astonishing variety of scenery and illustrate the entire cycle of industrial revolution , heyday , decay and reclamation . 

  You're never very far from urban centres but the walk sidesteps and swerves as cleverly as the best Welsh fly-halves to follow a largely rural route . 

  There are pastures which would not be out of place in the Peak District , woods reminiscent of mid Wales , sharp climbs and panoramic views . 

  We chose to tackle the walk from north to south , not least because the route passes our home in the south -- though the excellent official guide provides duplicate maps and instructions for waling it the other way . 

  There is thorough waymarking but , as ever , signs were of little use in really dense mist on the top of Mynydd Machen . 

  We needed a compass bearing to ensure we headed off in the right direction , a reminder that even a " valley " walk can land the unwary in difficulties . 

  For most of the way , though , the comprehensive guide was rarely out of our hands . 

  Without the background notes we would not have known that , among many other points of interest , our boots crunched long the line of an 1805 horse-drawn tram road and beside a pub used as a meeting for Chartist agitators . 

  Nor would we have known about the overnight accommodation in a converted farm , now a countryside centre , in the centrepiece 1,000-acre site Sirhowy Valley Country Park . 

  The walk has a good middle in the form of the countryside centre , but like any decent excursion it also has a good beginning and a good end . 

  And in this case there is a poignant link between the two . 

  In the north the walk begins near a grim hilltop council estate , at a ring of stones commemorating Tredegar-born Labour MP Aneurin Bevan , architect of the NHS . 

  In the south , the walk ends at Tredegar House -- the former home of the Lords of Tredegar , now a council-owned tourist attraction . 

  Lords at one end , a working class hero at the other , and in between an encounter with the history which linked and divided their fortunes -- that , surely , is a walk with a theme to remember . 

  Nature has reclaimed much of the land once given over to industry 

  NEW SERIES 

  MULTI-ACTIVITIES 

  PARAGLIDING 

  FLYING START 

  In the first of a new series on multi-activities Henry Druce gets high on paragliding 

  My first experience of airsports had not been a good one . 

  I was a passenger in a microlight and just after taking off the engine spluttered and we had to make an emergency landing . 

  It did not instill much confidence . 

  But that was a year ago and I was ready to take to the air again . 

  I went on an introductory course with ParAvion in Wiltshire to find out if I liked paragliding any better . 

  I joined an eight person group one Saturday morning at ParAvion's centre in Bishops Cannings . 

  All the others had done some paragliding before -- I was the only total beginner . 

  David Sollom , owner of the centre and one of the three instructors of the day , was enthusiastic about the conditions so we drove straight out to one of the four sites which the school uses . 

  It looked perfect -- gentle slopes within a semi circular bowl of hills . 

  In the protected area at the bottom of the hill the wind was gentle , but further up the slope it picked up considerably to 16-17 miles an hour . 

  David decided to test out the conditions -- his ten years of experience showed us what could be achieved with practice . 

  He glided effortlessly from one side of the hill to the other with total confidence , even having time to make jokes while trying to pluck a twig from a bush . 

  Although the conditions up the slope were ideal for the more experienced , they were too strong for novice pilots . 

  We went further down the slope to practise parachute landing falls and ground handling skills -- everything you need to know before actually launching yourself off the side of a hill . 

  With David's help I unfurled my multi-coloured paraglider , donned a helmet and strapped myself into the simple harness . 

  The harness is attached to the paraglider with four thick straps , one in front of the other on either side at chest height -- the front and rear risers . 

  These are then connected to the paraglider wing with many string-like strands of a strong material called Dyneema . 

  The first thing to do was build up a " wall " . 

  This meant pulling the risers to fill the paraglider -- called a wing -- with air and then making it lie evenly across the ground . 

  After practising this for a while the next stage was to get the wing overhead . 

  The paraglider itself is rectangular and made up of numerous cells or pockets running from the front to the rear of the wing . 

  These trap the air and so inflate the wing . 

  It was surprisingly easy to get the wing aloft with a step backwards and a sharp tug on the front risers . 

  You then turn round so you're facing forwards and constantly adjust the risers to keep the wing overhead . 

  Once we'd finished our ground handling practice we climbed the hill to check the wind . 

  It was still too strong so we sat and waited . 

  You must get used to waiting in this sport as it's so dependent on weather conditions -- it's unsafe for beginners to fly in wind speeds over 15mph . 

  The Gods smiled on us later in the afternoon with perfect conditions and a gentle 10mph wind stroking the hillside . 

  When David gave the all clear the paragliders were laid out on the hillside forming splashes of startling colour on the green backdrop . 

  The first person soon flew gracefully to the bottom of the hill , staying up for over a minute . 

  Butterflies were running rampage as my turn came . 

  " Just relax " said David " you shall love it " . 

  The others in the group were keen to see how I'd cope with my virgin flight . 

  I pulled the wing above my head , steadied it , turned and faced downhill and with a few steps forward , and a gentle push from David , I was airborne . 

  It was the most exhilarating sensation , flying high above the ground yet still feeling safe . 

  Landing was not a problem -- you just pull down on both hand controls at the same time to slow the paraglider as the ground approaches . 

  By early evening I'd done five more flights and was beginning to feel confident steering the paraglider . 

  And all on my first day -- this is the sport to capture the imagination . 

  Henry Druce went paragliding with ParAvion Paragliding , . 

  . 

  Cost of an introductory weekend course is 100 , a four day course 200 . 

  NATURE WATCH 

  AUGUST 

  Richard Marpole highlights the natural wonders you can see this month and outlines a walk in the Berwyn Mountains 

  STINKHORN 

  A woodland fungus not easily missed is the stinkhorn phallus impudicus . 

  It gives off a smell similar to that of rotting meat , so walkers can be forgiven for thinking there's a dead sheep in the area . 

  When first grown , the top of the fungus is coated in a black sticky jelly containing spores . 

  The smell of the fungus attracts flies and when they land they collect some of the jelly on their legs , which they then carry away , so spreading the fungus . 

  The example pictured has obviously been successful in its spore dispersal -- there's no black jelly left , so all the spores have gone . 

  RED ADMIRAL 

  Surprisingly , the red admiral butterfly migrates to this country from the Mediterranean each spring . 

  Those seen flying during the later part of the summer will be a second generation , hatched from eggs laid by the migrating individuals upon arrival . 

  In common with several other species , the red admiral favours the stinging nettle as a place to lay its eggs . 

  The adult butterflies feed on the flowers of several garden plants , including buddleia and Michaelmas daisies , and wild plants such as clover and scabious . 

  HERB ROBERT 

  Herb robert geranium robertianum flowers in many differing habitats including hedgebanks , damp woods , shingle on the seashore and on scree . 

  The name robertianum may be derived from a medieval scholar Robert , Duke of Normandy , or perhaps St Robert who founded the Cistercian order of monks . 

  The fruit has a long pointed protrusion , rather like a bird's beak , and that's how it gets the geranium name , meaning " crane " . 

  Herb robert was once believed to be a flower of importance to fairies and was widely used in medieval medicine . 

  DAMSELFLY 

  The damselfly is a striking sight which can often be seen settling on trees and bushes lining the banks of fast , clear streams . 

  The iridescent green body and dark purple wings make identification easy . 

  With most damselflies , the male and female differ in their colouring , but towards the end of the breeding season , the female will change colour to look much more like the male . 

  It is thought that this is to reduce the attractiveness of the females who have already bred and no longer want the attention of the males . 

  This can cause confusion at this time of year for naturalists trying to identify the sex of damselflies . 

  REDSTART 

  The redstart , named for its strikingly red tail , is mainly a woodland bird but will also be found in parks and gardens . 

  It prefers woodlands with an open canopy coupled with dense undergrowth and some clearings . 

  Nesting in holes in trees or , as this one , in walls , the redstart may raise two broods a year , each of six eggs . 

  It may even bee seen on the coast as it prepares for migration to its winter quarters in central Africa . 

  AUGUST IN THE BERWYN MOUNTAINS 

  Lake Vyrnwy is massive , capable of supplying 45 million gallons of water per day to Liverpool 70 miles away . 

  It's a five mile long artificial reservoir set among spectacular scenery in the Berwyn Mountains south of Snowdon . 

  The dam , completed in 1890 after nine years' work , is 390yds long and 127f thick at the base . 

  The walk around it is all on the road , but it is worth a quick circuit in the car . 

  The scenery really is wonderful . 

  Guidebooks liken it to the Austrian Alps , but my wife reckons it's more like the Norwegian fiords . 

  About one mile from the dam on the northern side of the lake is a magnificent Gothic style tower . 

  This is the Straining Tower , the main outlet for water from the reservoir . 

  Here the water is passed through massive sieves to remove any larger foreign matter , the first stage of purification . 

  16,000 acres of the moorland in the water catchment area are managed by the RSPB for the conservation of wildlife in an agreement with the owners of the land -- Severn Trent Water -- and the owners of the shooting rights . 

  Birds of prey which rely on the heather moorlands for nesting and rearing their young , such as merlin and hen harrier , can do so without the persecution which sometimes occurs when their existence is in conflict with grouse-shooting interests . 

  The woodland surrounding the reservoir is managed jointly by the Forestry Commission and Severn Trent Water . 

  There are both native woodland and conifer plantations which gives a rich mosaic of habitats for wildlife . 

  Both the red squirrel and the polecat can be found here . 

  AUGUST WALK IN THE BERWYN MOUNTAINS 

  Starting from the car park at the west end of Lake Vyrnwy is a four mile trail which takes in several different habitats , including mixed woodland , a conifer plantation , a river , a dramatic waterfall and the edge of the lake itself . 

  From the car park , go past the picnic tables to a stile with a green marker . 

  Cross this stile and walk diagonally across the field beyond . 

  Continue until the path meets a river , turn left and follow the river until you get to a bridge . 

  Cross the bridge and , after 20yds , cross a stile on the left . 

  Follow the track until you reach a T-junction with another track . 

  Turn left here to go to the waterfall Pistyll Rhyd-y-meinciau at the head of the valley . 

  This is a superb cascade -- the ideal place to stop and have lunch . 

  The intrepid will cross the river -- it's not too wide at this point -- and explore the height of the waterfall by walking up beside it to where there are superb views down the valley . 

  On the left of the waterfall , most of the way up , are wet boggy areas full of bright green sphagnum moss . 

  You can also find sundew and butterwort here . 

  Both make up for the lack of nutrients in the soil by trapping and digesting small insects . 

  Keep a look out too for buzzards soaring over the crags which surround you , and also for the odd kestrel . 

  Return to the T-junction and carry straight on , not forgetting to look at the lovely wild flowers on the left bank -- a mass of yellow pimpernel and birdsfoot trefoil . 

  When the track meets a road turn left and go along it for 150yds until you come to a bridge made of railway sleepers which crosses the stream on the right . 

  You should see some impressive herb robert growing on the back between the river and road . 

  The Straining Tower is where the water from the lake is passed through massive sieves 

  Go over the bridge and turn right immediately onto a track leading into the trees . 

  When the track turns sharp left , go right , stepping over a small stream then up the hill to a metal gate . 

  Cross the stile beside it . 

  Immediately after the stile is a lovely little mountain stream crossed by stepping stones . 

  There's a fine sessile oak tree overhanging the path here . 

  Sessile oaks have leaves which narrow down to a longish stalk , while the acorns , which should be appearing about now , are almost stalkless on their twigs -- sessile means without a stalk . 

  Follow on between two fences with lichen-encrusted hawthorn trees on the right . 

  This area is noted for butterflies in the summer , and in August the purple hairstreak will be on the wing . 

  At any time of year you're likely to see plenty of birds , including nuthatch , green woodpecker and jay . 

  When the path meets a farm track , turn right and go down the hill , through several gates to the road . 

  Cross the road into a narrow conifer plantation , on the far side of which is a bridge onto Rhiwargor Island , owned by the RSPB . 

  A nature trail leads through an area of mixed woodland to a bird hide overlooking the top end of Lake Vyrnwy . 

  This piece of woodland contrasts dramatically with the conifer plantation on the other side of the bridge . 

  The open canopy allows light to fall on the ground , so a great variety of plants can grow here . 

  There are many woodland flowers , such as wood sorrel , bluebell , fox glove and wood anemone . 

  Ferns include the broad buckler , and there are species of fungi such as the stinkhorn . 

  The hide is a good place to spend some time , not only to see the more common bird species such as heron , coot and several kinds of tit , but you might also be lucky enough to spot less common birds such as the great spotted woodpecker and the kingfisher . 

  The common hawker dragonfly also patrols this area looking for prey and can be seen from early June until late September . 

  Very lucky visitors may even see an otter here -- but do not hold me to it ! 

  Retrace the route to the road , and walk left , either along the road or through the plantation to the car park . 

  NATURE WALK FACT FILE 

  Maps 

  O. S. Map 1:50,000 . 

  Landranger series , sheet 125 . 

  Bala &amp;amp; Lake Vyrnwy . 

  Tourist Information Centres 

  There is a visitor centre in a converted chapel near the Vyrnwy dam . 

  Information on the wildlife and leaflets on several nature trails are available from this centre . . 

  Campsites . 

  Outdoor Pursuits . 

  Climbing , abseiling , sailing , orienteering , canoeing , catering for individuals or groups . 

  Can also organise courses on local natural history if required . 

  COMING SOON 

  SEPTEMBER'S WILDLIFE AND A WALK IN THE CAIRNGORMS 

  THE NATURAL WORLD IN OCTOBER AND A WALK ON DARTMOOR 

  NOVEMBER'S FLORA AND FAUNA AND A WALK IN THE LAKES . 

  DECEMBER IN THE COUNTRYSIDE AND A WALK AROUND SLIMBRIDGE 

  MARKET ROUND UP 

  TORCHES 

  We throw light on the different kinds of torches currently available in the shops 

  1 

  SOLARA SOLAR TORCH Design : a rechargeable torch which uses a solar panel to convert light directly into electricity . 

  The sensitivity of the panel allows the torch to be recharged , even when it's not in direct sunlight . 

  It comes with a 240v mains charger to initially charge the torch . 

  This is also used to boost the charge when the torch has not received enough natural light . 

  Recharged , the torch gives up to 40 minutes of light per day . 

  Price : 18.45 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  2 

  PETZL ZOOM HEAD TORCH Design : the torch is water resistant . 

  The direction of light is adjustable as the torch rests on a pivot . 

  The beam is altered by twisting the head of the torch . 

  It takes either a flat battery ( MN1203 ) , three AA batteries ( MN1500 ) with a round cell adaptor E06 , or a Petzl E55 rechargeable battery . 

  Price : approx 17.99 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  3 

  MINI MAGLITE Design : a handy sized torch with a twist head which adjusts the light beam . 

  Comes with a spare bulb . 

  It takes two AA size alkaline batteries . 

  Price : 9.99 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  4 

  WATERPROOF TORCH Design : a waterproof rubber torch with a wide beam and attachment strap . 

  Takes two R20 batteries . 

  Price : 2.30 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  5 

  ANGLE FLASH LIGHT Design : a small angled torch with a pen clip . 

  It takes two AA size batteries . 

  Price : 6.50 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  6 

  EVER READY R SERIES Design : a waterproof torch which can float in water . 

  It comes with a krypton bulb and uses two Ever Ready R20 Silver Seal batteries . 

  Price : 7.99 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  7 

  DURACELL KRYPTON UNIVERSAL Design : functions three ways as spotlight , hazard warning light or as a free standing fluorescent lamp . 

  It comes with a wrist strap and uses four Duracell MN 1500 batteries . 

  Price : 12.75 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  8 

  UKE 4AA LIGHT Design : a waterproof torch with a very bright light beam . 

  It takes four AA batteries . 

  Price : 14.99 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  BUYERS' GUIDE 

  TRIED AND TESTED 

  PENTAX WEATHER ZOOM CAMERA 

  This Pentax weather-resistant camera arrived to be tested at a very opportune moment -- I was just about to head off for a surfing weekend in North Cornwall . 

  As I stood up to my waist in water trying to capture the surfing action in Widemouth Bay , I found this fully automatic camera remarkably easy to use . 

  Apart from its handy size and weather resistant body the most useful feature was the 38mm-90mm zoom lens , simple operated by two buttons . 

  This meant I did not have to get risk life and limb to get a good close up shot . 

  Also useful was the continuous shooting mode ensuring that I did not miss any of the action as surfers sped past me . 

  I've since often used the camera out on the hill and have found its many other features very useful . 

  These include a macro lens at the touch of a button -- great for capturing details of flowers -- and a fully automatic built in flash which gives out a pre-flash emission to minimise " red eye " . 

  I particularly liked the detachable remote control unit which not only allows you to operate the shutter but also the zoom . 

  The proof is in the pudding as the saying goes , and in camera terms that means the photographs . 

  Both the print and slide films I used of landscapes turned out well , although my surfing shots did not have the same richness of colours . 

  However it was very bright on the water and perhaps the film speed was too high . 

  Overall I was impressed with the camera's performance . 

  It has all the best features of a modern compact camera with the benefit of a body which makes it highly resilient to outdoor use . 

  Price : 229.99 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  THERM-A-REST'R CHAIR KIT 

  Design : a kit designed to convert Therm-A-Rest mattresses into a chair suitable for camping/ outdoor use . 

  The chair is made by folding the mattress and inserting the two opposite ends into two fabric pockets . 

  Adjustable straps on the pockets hold the mattress in position . 

  Material : taslanised nylon and coated nylon Oxford fabric . 

  Weight : 10oz . 

  Price : from approx 34.99 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  LOWE HIGH PLAINS RUCKSACK 

  The Lowe High Plains 70 litre rucksack is a well made bag which is comfortable to carry , even with a heavy load . 

  The rucksack incorporates Lowe's Paralux adjustable back system which gives four levels of adjustment to fit your back size . 

  There is also a large lumber pad which rests comfortably against the pit of your back and a well padded hip belt giving a snug fit . 

  The pack has two aluminium staves running parallel inside the main compartment which give stability and rigidity to the whole structure . 

  A zip out internal divider gives you the choice of either two inner compartments or one large one . 

  A small weather flap with a pull drawcord gives added protection at the top of the main compartment . 

  This is a well balanced rucksack , with good carrying capacity for long trips , at an affordable price . 

  Fabric : body TXP 700 , base TXN 1000s . 

  Price : 99.95 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  GRANGERS G WASH 

  Design : a liquid soap suitable for washing hands and clothing which comes in a compact plastic tube with a flip top lid . 

  Size : a 50ml tube is sufficient for 100 washes . 

  Price : 1.99 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  DISCOVERY BOOTS FROM LLEWELYN WYNNE 

  Design : a lightweight walking boot with nylon and leather uppers and a man made sole . 

  Sizes : 3 -- 11 . 

  Price : 30 . 

  Contact : &amp;amp; name ; , , . 

  ACCESS FOR THE DISABLED 

  Making way 

  A little careful planning is all that is needed to make the countryside more accessible to the disabled . 

  Hazel Constance explains what can be done 

  Before his accident , Roger Davis was a keen walker , cyclist and backpacker . 

  " I depend on a manual wheelchair for all movement away from my car . 

  This is because of a sleepy driver who knocked me off my bicycle one evening in 1980 , breaking my back and severing my spinal cord . 

  I now try to live as independent a life as possible . 

  Over the intervening years one of my great laments has been my inability to achieve solitude , as everywhere I can now go , so can everyone else . 

  I like exploring country lanes with a knapsack on the back of my wheelchair , OS map in hand and binoculars within easy reach . 

  I'd like to follow footpaths but the obstructions are too frequent . 

  What obstructions , you may well wonder ? 

  There are many -- kissing gates which are too small to allow me through , pathways which drop steeply at the edge so I cannot move to the side to open the gate , well-meaning people who put deep grit or gravel onto the surface of the path , making my progress slow and tiring , and deep mud where horses and motorbikes have also used the path . 

  And of course , there are also natural barriers such as roots , ruts , streams without bridges , deep undergrowth , steep slopes and rock faces . 

  While attempting to make the wheelchair or baby-buggy pusher's life easier , planners often do not help by making ramps up and over steps too steep for any but the most fearless . 

  Wheelchairs are easy to tip over backwards so a recommended maximum slope for ramps is an inch in height gained per foot of incline . 

  I need to be able to see the path ahead in order to plan my route well in advance , or else I may get myself into an awkward position . 

  In these cases I either have to wait for a passing walker and ask for assistance , try to reverse my direction or take the plunge and risk damage to chair and body . 

  With laid surfaces such as tarmac , another hazard is the camber -- the slight upward curve to the centre of the surface of a road or track . 

  This can be steep , making progress forward difficult -- you have to hold one wheel and push hard on the other just to stop yourself from rolling down it . 

  My life is now largely spent looking at places , observing the actions of other people and spotting birds and wildlife . 

  Despite all the drawbacks , I still enjoy getting out and about in the countryside whenever I can . 

  I could spend hours watching the birds on the coast of Norfolk , where a boardwalk makes access easy for me , or simply pushing myself around Richmond Park . 

  The countryside is there for us all to enjoy , so please , those of you who are responsible for making it accessible , remember those who , like me , need more than a kissing gate to get in . " 

  Walking with a wheelchair 

  Everyone needs exercise to keep healthy . 

  It may be just a gentle daily stroll or cycle ride or something much more strenuous . 

  Most of us have the luxury of choice but others are limited by what they can do by their physical disabilities . 

  Ironically many of these people were once keen sports enthusiasts who , due to injury or accident , find themselves confined to a wheelchair . 

  These people are not " different " -- they are the same as you and I , except that they have lost the ability to use their legs and have to rely on a wheelchair to get about . 

  Many of them are able to get around independently and , like the rest of use , have every right to enjoy a country walk . 

  Where to go 

  There are many short walks in some of our forests classified as " walks for the disabled " . 

  But the more active wheelchair user needs a bit more of a challenge than a push along a 1,200 ft path round a Forestry Commission car park . 

  Possibilities for wheelchair users wanting to enjoy more challenging routes do exist . 

  Many country parks offer ideal facilities with properly surfaced level paths , specially adapted toilets , accessible hides for birdwatching and special fishing platforms . 

  The grounds of some of the larger National Trust properties are ideal for those who can push themselves around , and in many cases fairly long distances can be covered . 

  Old converted railway paths offer splendid opportunities , although circular walks are not usually possible . 

  Our forests also have some interesting trails , but in some places a strong person is needed to push the chair . 

  For the independent pusher , it can be frustrating when you wheel yourself around a likely " circular " route , only to discover some steps have not been marked on the map so you have to turn round and come back exactly the same way . 

  This happened to me in Clumber Park , the National Trust Country Park in Nottinghamshire . 

  This park is otherwise ideal for wheelchair users with some 13 miles of tarmac roads -- although there are some steepish slopes . 

  Ferry Meadows Country Park , near Peterborough , is another place where long circular walks are possible . 

  However , wheelchair users will need a helper to negotiate the bridge over the Nene . 

  Other places with good facilities include Hartsholme Country Park in Lincoln and Hinchingbrooke Country Park near Huntingdon . 

  At Wicken Fen in Cambridgeshire there is a 1.25 mile boardwalk , enabling visitors to see much of the interesting flora and fauna of this special place . 

  And at Tangham , near to Woodbridge in Suffolk , a trail for wheelchairs has been incorporated into the Phoenix Trail , commemorating the replanting of the woodlands devastated in the great storms of 1987 . 

  In the Peak District , the Manifold Trail has eight miles of level tarmac , with access points along the way . 

  The Bernwood gate was originally designed for keeping out motorcycles and horses from the Bernwood Butterfly Trail in Oxford , while still allowing wheelchairs to pass through . 

  Sketch : Forestry Commission 

  Special centres 

  There are also special centres , such as those run by the Calvert Trust offering outdoor activities for the disabled . 

  Unfortunately these are in great demand and not everyone is able to take advantage of them . 

  A fence at the bottom of a flight of steps works as an effective safety measure for infirm walkers . 

  If they should fall down the steps the fence will stop them going onto the road . 

  Sketch : Forestry Commission 

  How to help 

  So what can we all do to make it easier for our disabled friends to enjoy the countryside ? 

  When you are next out on a walk , take a look and see of a wheelchair could get through a kissing gate . 

  Special gates are available , known as the Bernwood Gates . 

  These were first designed to keep out horses and motorcycles from the Bernwood Butterfly trail in Oxfordshire while allowing access to wheelchairs . 

  One of these special gates is located near the deer-watching platform at Bolderwood Grounds in the New Forest , and allows a wheelchair user access to see the deer -- although the platform ramp is rather steep . 

  Perhaps we should be asking our local authorities to install wheelchair access gates in place of ordinary kissing gates wherever possible . 

  If you find deep gravel paths in your local park , write to your local parks department and ask that the paths instead be covered with firmly rolled gravel to make them suitable for use by wheelchair users . 

  If you see someone who you think might need a push , ask first if your help is needed as the chair user might well be undertaking a personal challenge . 

  If help is required you will probably be asked , although there is nothing wrong with offering your assistance . 

  Please try to avoid the " does he take sugar ? " approach , ask the person in the chair directly " Would you like a push ? " rather than ask their companion if they have one . 

  If you're a member of a rambling club why not help organise a walk for local disabled people ? 

  Croydon YHA Group have been organising Wheelchair Rambles for many years . 

  The group arranges transport and pushers , works out a suitable route and tries to arrange a pub lunch and tea . 

  They're always great fun and well worth the effort . 

  Why not see what you can do ? 

  This split barrier is an ideal solution for keeping out undesirables such as motorbikes while giving room for wheelchairs to pass through easily . 

  Sketch : Forestry Commission 

  FACT FILE 

  Books 

  The Countryside and Wildlife for Disabled People is a useful book published by Radar ( The Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation ) . 

  It contains a list of more than 900 sites , fishing and birdwatching facilities and adventure centres . 

  It costs 3 ( inc p&amp;amp;p ) from RADAR , . 

  Facilities for Disabled Visitors to National Trust Properties is available free from , . 

  Please enclose an SAE . 

  Several county authorities also publish access guides . 

  It's worth contacting your local County Council Planning Department for more information . 

  Useful groups 

  The Fieldfare Trust , , . 

  The Trust promotes enjoyment and education in the countryside , especially for those who due to disability or disadvantage are handicapped in pursuing opportunities . 

  The Jubilee Sailing Trust , , for information on cruises as a member of a mixed able-bodied/ disabled crew . 

  Calvert Trust Kielder , , . 

  Adventure activities and holidays for disabled people in purpose built centre . 

  GEAR GUIDE 

  RUCKSACKS 

  Buying the right sack is an absolute must for trouble free walking . 

  Our comprehensive gear guide gives all the facts and useful tips to help you make the right choice 

  The type of rucksack you need will depend entirely on what you want to do with it so it's essential to assess your requirements carefully before you buy . 

  A daysack should be capable of holding waterproofs , food and a drinks flask , extra jersey , map and compass and a small first aid kit , plus perhaps a camera . 

  Most daysacks have a simple padded back , padded slings and possibly a small waist strap . 

  Weekend and hostelling sacks need to be larger , as you shall have to carry extra clothes , nightwear and washing kit , plus extra food . 

  For light loads you may be comfortable with a simple padded back system , but many people will opt for some kind of frame at this stage . 

  If camping overnight you shall need still more space in which to carry tent , sleeping bag and mat and cooking equipment , and for longer periods you shall need extra clothes as well . 

  At this level you definitely require a frame . 

  Finally , for backpacking and expeditions in winter time , extra capacity must be allowed for thicker clothing , bulkier sleeping bags , etc . 

  Crampon and ice-axe attachments will also be needed . 

  CHOOSING 

  How much will a rucksack hold ? 

  Most manufacturers quote the capacity of a sack in litres . 

  Typically , a daysack will hold from 15-30 litres , a weekend or hostelling sack from 35-55 litres , and a backpacking or expedition sack from 60-85 litres . 

  It is tempting to get a large capacity sack if you know you shall have a lot to carry , but bear in mind that it could tempt you to carry too much ! 

  On the other hand , a sack which is too small to carry what you need will be a nuisance , and uncomfortable to wear if crammed full . 

  Some rucksacks offer extra carrying capacity by incorporating extendable hoods and expanding side pockets . 

  Others have optional add-on pockets and accessory straps for carrying extra gear on the outside of the sack . 

  This type of sack can be useful if you need a pack for backpacking , weekend use and day walking , as it will have compression straps which make it easy to reduce the size . 

  Occasionally sacks can be obtained with a " zip-off " front pocket which can be converted to a day sack , although these are mostly to be found on convertible sacks used as travel luggage . 

  FITTING 

  The back length of a rucksack is critical for comfort , especially when backpacking , and if you do not have the right size you shall soon know all about it . 

  A well-fitting sack allows the load to be balanced between the shoulder harness and the hip belt without putting a strain on your shoulders or arms . 

  Quality manufacturers will offer sacks with a " fixed back length " in several different sizes , so be sure your pack fits correctly and try it on with a realistic load before buying . 

  As a general rule , the centre point of the shoulder harness , where it is attached to the back or frame , should be level with the centre of your shoulder blades . 

  The hip belt should be adjusted so that it fits snugly on the hip girdle , and not round the waist . 

  Many manufacturers offer packs with adjustable harnesses , allowing the wearer to get the correct fit . 

  Some of these designs can be adjusted when the sack is fully loaded and being worn -- others have to be adjusted beforehand . 

  These are particularly useful if the sack is intended for group use , or for young people who are still growing . 

  Some manufacturers make " women's rucksacks " which have a shorter back length and specially shaped shoulder slings and hip belt to fit the female figure . 

  It has to be said however , that not all women have short backs , nor all men long ones ! 

  CONSTRUCTION 

  Most modern sacks have internal frames , designed to fit the shape of the back . 

  They may be made from aluminium , fibreglass or plastic , and can be anything from a simple pair of flexible aluminium or plastic bars to a complicated collection of alloy pieces riveted together and linked to the harness . 

  Most can be shaped by hand to get a personal fit . 

  Some frames are removable , so that when a lighter load is carried it is not necessary to carry the extra weight of the frame . 

  External frames are sometimes available , but are less stable to carry . 

  Their main advantage is for carrying bulky pieces of equipment for expeditions . 

  FABRICS 

  Most rucksacks are made from heavyweight nylon with a waterproof coating on the inside and often a water repellent treatment on the outer surface . 

  The fabric may be textured to give it a rougher surface , resembling canvas . 

  Cotton canvas is still sometimes used . 

  Generally speaking , cotton canvas is the most hard-wearing fabric , followed by nylon and polyester . 

  However , proofed cotton canvas can be very heavy , and it gets dirty very quickly . 

  Most people now opt for one of the textured nylons , such as Ardura , Cordura or Kodra . 

  Special fabrics are often used for the backs of sacks to assist in combatting perspiration which is bound to occur when the sack is close to your back . 

  Some , such as Advent , can take up a certain amount of moisture , but also dry quickly . 

  Although rucksack fabrics are supposedly waterproof , always use a rucksack liner , plus polythene bags round individual items , to ensure your kit is kept dry . 

  MAIN SACK 

  Small rucksacks will have one main compartment , whereas larger ones may be divided into two compartments . 

  Sometimes this can be converted back to a single compartment when bulky items have to be carried , either by zipping out the dividing panel or by loosening a drawcord . 

  Some sacks will also have an extension at the top of the main compartment made from lighter fabric which is known as a snow lock . 

  The lid or hood of the main sack is often elasticated round the edge to give a close fit and prevent rain from getting in . 

  STRAPS AND BUCKLES 

  Straps on harnesses should be long enough to give good adjustment , but not so long that the ends dangle ! 

  Top tension straps , or lift straps as they are often called , help to give fine adjustment to the fit of the rucksack on your back . 

  They can be tightened to bring the top of the sack closer to the back , spreading the load over the shoulder harness and enabling the wearer to keep an upright stance , thus improving the stability . 

  The straps can be slackened to allow greater air circulation between the back and the sack if sweating becomes a problem . 

  Chest straps can also aid stability , and help keep the shoulder harness in the right place . 

  A waist strap may be used on a light daysack to provide extra stability . 

  Accessory straps can be useful for attaching bulky items to the outside of the pack . 

  The main closing straps on a sack may incorporate extra sliders to allow for carrying a sleeping mat . 

  Ice-axe loops and straps should be incorporated on sacks intended for use in snow and ice . 

  Never try to carry too many items on the outside of your pack -- if you need to do this , your sack is too small ! 

  Compression straps allow the contents of a half-full rucksack to be distributed evenly , allowing a balanced load . 

  Additionally , these straps can sometimes be used to attach extra side pockets . 

  Most rucksacks have quick-release buckles , particularly on the profile or main closing straps . 

  Ladderlock buckles are often used on the shoulder harness and lift straps , as these are somewhat easier to adjust when load bearing . 

  A quick release buckle on the hipbelt is essential in case a pack needs to be thrown off in an emergency . 

  POCKETS 

  Pockets on a rucksack need to be large enough to hold the things you want to put in them ! 

  Some people prefer to carry a stove in an outside pocket , particularly if it is liquid-fuelled , to prevent other gear from becoming contaminated . 

  Other items which warrant pocket space include camera , lunch pack and first aid kit , as all need to be readily accessible . 

  A pocket on the hood will often accommodate your waterproofs , and an internal hood pocket makes a secure place to keep your travel documents . 

  PACKING 

  How you pack your sack depends on your chosen activity . 

  Backpackers need to keep the weight high and close to the back , but ski-mountaineers and climbers need the weight to be kept lower to increase stability , although weighty things should be kept close to the back . 

  Pack anything you are likely to need en route either in a pocket or close to the top . 

  A good packing routine for backpackers is to pack the sleeping bag and spare clothes in the bottom of the sack , then pack things like food and pans , padded by some of your clothing , with your spare pullover near the top . 

  Last in should be the tent , which can be carried under the rucksack flap , and your waterproofs . 

  Pack everything in polythene bags or waterproof stuff sacks , and pack your pans and stove in bags to prevent them soiling other kit . 

  Never carry more than one-third of your body weight , and aim to carry about one quarter of it . 

  PUTTING ON A PACK 

  Putting on a heavy pack is not always easy -- the best way is to stand the pack on the ground with the harness facing you and the slings slackened off . 

  Flex your knees , grasp the top of the harness with both hands , lift the pack and balance it on your right thigh . 

  Still holding the sling in your left hand , slip your right arm into its sling and , taking the weight on the right shoulder , lift the pack onto your back . 

  Put the left arm into its sling and lift the pack so that the hop belt rests on your hips . 

  Fasten the buckle and tighten the hip belt , then adjust the shoulder slings and lift-straps so that the load is comfortable . 

  Reverse the procedure when removing the pack . 

  CARE AND MAINTENANCE 

  Keep your pack clean by brushing off any loose dirt with a soft brush after use . 

  Remove stubborn marks by scrubbing lightly with a nail brush , using warm water and soap suds . 

  A reproofing spray , such as Grangers' Super-Pruf or Nikwax's Texnik , may be used on the outside of the pack when necessary . 

  Check your pack regularly for torn fabric , loose stitching , broken buckles , etc . 

  Check the frame parts for loose rivets , screws or missing bolts . 

  Get any repairs done before your packs fails you when in use . 

  A good pack should not cause problems if it is looked after properly . 

  If you do have problems , contact your retailer who will be able to put you in touch with a specialist repairer . 

  GLOSSARY 

  Accessory straps : Often used to attach additional slide pockets to give extra space , or to attach bulky items which are too big to fit into the sack . 

  On mountaineering sacks , straps are provided for crampons and ice-axe . 

  Advent : A synthetic fabric with a cotton feel , which will not rot , holds little water and has good abrasion resistance . 

  It's particularly effective when used for back panels . 

  Aergo : The name given to Karrimor's moulded backsystem designed to give good ventilation to the back area and distribute the load between the hips and shoulders , as in an adjustable system . 

  Air Circulation System : Jack Wolfskin's system of a moulded perforated plate attached to the back of the sack , with a mesh screen stretched over giving maximum comfort and breathability . 

  Air comfort : Systems often using a shaped and stitched padded back which allows a current of air to pass between the rucksack and the wearer . 

  Ardura : A texturised nylon cloth with high tear and abrasion resistance , woven exclusively for Berghaus and specially coated to improve water resistance . 

  Ballistics Cloth : American term for waterproof heavyweight nylon . 

  Chest straps : Help to keep the shoulder slings in a comfortable position ; useful carrying a heavy load . 

  Compression straps : Straps around the sides of a rucksack which can compress the sack when partially full . 

  Cordura : Heavyweight texturised and proofed nylon . 

  Format : Karrimor's shaped and malleable closed cell pad with aluminium frame , mainly used in climbing sacks and in the Papoose Classic baby carrier . 

  Frame : This may be internal , external , moulded or simply two straight or curved plastic or metal bars . 

  Some frames may be integral with the harness , and can be adjusted to suit the wearer . 

  Harness : The arrangement of slings and webbing by which the load is carried . 

  All shoulder slings have some adjustment and some harnesses are adjustable to suit back length . 

  The hip-belt may be consider part of the harness . 

  HD Plus : High density woven nylon cloth with cotton feel and high resistance to abrasion and tearing . 

  Several coats of polyurethane proofing are applied and the fabric is soft and flexible . 

  Hip Belt : A padded and shaped belt designed to sit on the hips and take the load from the shoulders . 

  It should be fitted with a quick-release buckle . 

  Kodex : A 700 denier-woven polyester/ nylon cloth with a heavy textured appearance , coated with polyurethane or PVC . 

  Kodra : A semi-texturised nylon , available in different weights and densities , may be polyurethane or PVC coated . 

  KS100e : A 500 denier closely woven nylon fabric with an elastomeric coating on the back and stain and water resistant finish on the face of the fabric . 

  KS100e Heavyweight : 1000 denier version above , higher tear strength . 

  KS100L : A laminate fabric approximately 10x more waterproof than other rucksack materials . 

  KS100t A texturised polyester fabric , coated for water resistance . 

  Similar to KS100e , but not quite to robust . 

  Lift straps : small straps at top of shoulder slings for fine adjustment to load carrying . 

  Also called tension straps . 

  Lumbar Pad : A padded foam " cushion " at base of the back panel for support and comfort . 

  Some detachable/ adjustable . 

  Nylon : A plain weave nylon . 

  The denier number is size of the individual threads and indicates of durability . 

  The higher the number , the thicker the thread . 

  Oxford Nylon : Medium weight , coarsely woven nylon . 

  Pack Cloth : Heavyweight woven nylon . 

  PU Nylon : Nylon with pu proofing . 

  Ripstop : A construction of fabric using a grid of stronger fibres at regular intervals to improve overall strength . 

  Texturised Nylon : Nylon fabric from yarns with a rough finish , giving greater tear/ abrasion resistance than plain nylon . 

  Texturised Polyester : Similar to texturised nylon , but woven from polyester yarns , which are lighter . 

  Tear resistance is about the same as texturised nylon but abrasion resistance is less . 

  OUT &amp;amp; ABOUT Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country . 

  Walks compiled by Catherine Moore 

  1 

  Wester Ross Long moorland climb around Strath na Sealga 

  2 

  Inverness-shire Circuit giving excellent views around Loch Affric 

  3 

  Galloway The Loch Trool Forest Trail in the Galloway Forest Park 

  4 

  Northumberland Greenleighton moor walk on the Wallington Estate 

  5 

  East Cumbria Around Alston Moor through an area rich in history 

  6 

  Lake District A walk to the summit of Lord's Seat 

  7 

  North Yorkshire The Centenary Way long distance path 

  8 

  Snowdonia A challenging walk along Nantlle Ridge 

  9 

  Shropshire Valley and open moorland around the Long Mynd 

  10 

  Pembrokeshire A three hour walk to the Bedd Morris stone 

  11 

  Brecon Beacons Walk to seven waterfalls in the Vale of Neath 

  12 

  East Anglia Walking along the 50 mile Suffolk Coast Path 

  13 

  Dorset From Cerne Abbas to the Cerne Giant 

  14 

  Cornwall Trail to New Stone Age burial remains at Zennor Quoit 

  CORRIE HALLIE TO THE SOUTH OF STRATH NA SEALGA 

  This walk involves a long moorland climb in the shadow of high rocky peaks . 

  At the same time you will be rewarded by impressive views of a quiet inland loch and its surrounding mountains . 

  Start from the layby next to the Dundonnell River which is two and a half miles south of Dundonnell on the A832 . 

  From here you follow a tractor track climbing the opposite slope which passes through a gate and continues through the birch woods beside Allt Gleann Chaorachain . 

  The path becomes very rough where it leaves the burn and climbs steeply out of the glen . 

  Soon afterwards the path splits -- marked by three cairns . 

  Take the right hand path which cuts over the shoulder of Sail Liath and drops down to Shenavall , near the head of Loch na Sealga . 

  Go left here , along the valley floor before turning left again to return to your start point over the high moors . 

  Along the way there are good views of the peaks of An Teallach and the rugged hills to the south of Strath na Sealga . 

  Recommended by Ross and Cromarty Tourist Board . 

  CIRCUIT OF LOCH AFFRIC 

  Glen Affric is considered to be one of the most beautiful glens in Scotland and there are plenty of excellent walks in the area . 

  This circuit of Lock Affric will give you wonderful views of the lochs , mountains and woodlands which characterise this glen . 

  The walk starts at the car park at the eastern end of Loch Affric from where you drop down the track to the bridge over the river flowing out of the loch . 

  After 100yds you will come to a path junction -- take the right hand fork and follow the track through the ancient Caledonian pine forest . 

  The path continues for just over four miles to the cottage at Athnamulloch . 

  Here there are great views of the wild upper reaches of Glen Affric with the Kintail Mountains rising dramatically behind . 

  From Athnamulloch take the path to the right which crosses over the bridge . 

  After around 400yds a faint path doubles back heading past a low hill and Loch Coulavie . 

  The path then climbs the hillside a little and gives impressive views over Loch Affric . 

  After dropping down towards Affric Lodge a good track follows the loch shore back to the car park . 

  Recommended by Inverness , Loch Ness and Nairn Tourist Board . 

  LOCH TROOL FOREST TRAIL 

  The Loch Trool Forest Trail makes its way around Loch Trool in the Galloway Forest Park . 

  Much of it is through forest including oakwoods now designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest . 

  Good views can be had over the loch and over to the Merrick , at 2,770f the highest peak in the Southern Uplands . 

  The trail starts from the shop in the middle of the campsite and follows a road to the east leading to a well-marked trail climbing into a plantation of larch trees . 

  The trail then wends its way through an old wood of Scots pine , silver fir and European larch . 

  The trail traverses the steep , rocky slopes of Mulldonoch and continues above the valley of the Buchan Burn to Benyellary . 

  The footbridge over the Glenhead Burn marks the eastern limit of the trail . 

  Here , the 212-mile Southern Uplands Way which has been following the same route since Caldons Wood , heads further eastwards . 

  You soon pass through oakwoods at Glenhead and Buchan -- remnants of the original natural forest . 

  The trail follows the trail follows the road between the Gairland Burn and the Bruce's Stone around Buchan House . 

  Continue to the Bruce's Stone which commemorates the battle of 13-7 marking the turning point in Robert the Bruce's fortunes . 

  From the Bruce's Stone the public road is followed until Glen Trool Lodge . 

  Its grounds are private and to the west of the lodge the trail leaves the road to cross Kenmure Moss . 

  Between the loch and your start point at Caldons campsite you need to follow a short section of the Water of Trool . 

  Recommended by the Forestry Commission . 

  GREENLEIGHTON MOOR WALK 

  This walk takes you around moorland through a forest , by a reservoir and through a nature reserve all on the National Trusts' 13,00 acre Wallington Estate in Northumberland . 

  The walk should only be undertaken from June 1 until October 31 so that the vitally important calving and lambing seasons remain undisturbed . 

  Throughout the walk is waymarked with white arrows . 

  From the car park you turn right along the old track by the quarry and walk north with the quarry on your right . 

  Continue along the track and turn right before you reach a gate . 

  Go left through the trees and climb over a ladder stile . 

  Walk through the edge of the plantation ahead and follow the track north across the moor to reach the iron age enclosures just south of the Fallowlees Burn . 

  The walk follows the line of the Fallowlees Burn and the southern edge of the Fontburn Reservoir passing through the Fallowlees Nature Reserve . 

  The reserve covers three acres of the valley and is home to early purple orchids and broadleaved cotton grass . 

  If you are lucky you might also catch sight of an otter around the burn . 

  Near the western end of the reservoir you can see a bronze age burial mound and a cup and ring marked boulder which may also date from the same period . 

  Towards the eastern end of the Fontburn Reservoir , the path makes its way out of the woods and heads first south , and then you turn right along the line of the shake holes -- natural craters formed by water -- eroding limestone . 

  The path climbs to the top of Greenleighton Hill ( 983f ) . 

  After you have walked down , follow the track by the quarry back to the car park . 

  Recommended by The National Trust . 

  AROUND ALSTON MOOR 

  The walk starts from the Crown Inn at Overwater , a hamlet within Nenthead . 

  There's a car park between the main road and the pub . 

  From here walk away from the main road and go left onto Dene Terrace , crossing the stile into the wood at the end . 

  Continue into Dowgang Hush . 

  Walk up the steps on your right , over the stile and follow the wall up the steep field to the road . 

  Turn right and then left onto a track . 

  Turn right where you see a waymark arrow and bear left crossing the stile around 150yds further on . 

  Follow the wall and markers and cross over the causeway . 

  You will come to a track where you turn right to bring you to the main road . 

  Turn left here and just before Welgill House take a path to the right . 

  Cross the river by the footbridge and turn left along the track by the river . 

  Continue along the river and cross over the footbridge just after Gudham Gill flows into the River Nent . 

  Follow Gudham Fill until you reach a road . 

  Turn right and continue until you reach the buildings of Dykeheads and then take the rough track to the left . 

  Where this track bends to the left cross a wallstile next to a gateway . 

  Bear right to cross the drainage ditch by the stone bridge . 

  Follow the ditch towards the wall which is crossed by a stile and then bear diagonally left up the field . 

  Continue past the derelict wall to the footbridge . 

  Cross the footbridge and wallstile before crossing another stile to bring you to High House . 

  Follow the path past the house , cross the next two fields and follow the sunken hollow to reach the road . 

  Go right and then turn right at the junction with the A689 to Weardale , follow the road down the hill and take the path through the gateway on the left . 

  When you come to the main track turn right towards Nenthead . 

  The track descends back to the start . 

  Recommended by East Cumbria Countryside Project . 

  WALK TO SUMMIT OF LORD'S SEAT 

  The forest around the Whinlatter Pass area in the north-western Lake District is the oldest Forestry Commission forest and the location for many varied walks . 

  To the west of the forest an hour long walk takes you to an impressive waterfall , Spout Force . 

  Elsewhere you can walk through the forest up to the summit of Grisedale Pike or Seat How . 

  This walk through goes through the main body of the forest to the north of the visitor centre and into open country , giving spectacular views over Bassenthwaite Lake and the surrounding countryside . 

  Route finding in the forest is made easier if you follow a series of numbered posts dotted around . 

  For this walk you start from the visitor centre and head first west and then north-east to post two . 

  Continue north to post three and follow the trail round until you hit open country and reach post number five and then post six . 

  Curve round west to post 23 and then head to the summit of Lord's Seat . 

  From here you can see right over the Solway Firth to the Scottish lowlands . 

  From Lord's Seat make your way north-east then east to the rocky Barf . 

  Descend and head back into the forest going south-west then south to post 21 . 

  Follow the track to post eight and turn left at the track junction at post nine . 

  Follow the track to post 11 . 

  Turn right at the next track junction to return to the visitor centre . 

  Recommended by The Forestry Commission . 

  THE CENTENARY WAY 

  A hundred years of county council government seems a strange reason to create a long distance path , but North Yorkshire County Council thought it a good enough excuse . 

  And they've come up with a splendid route , over 80 miles of miles of deep valley walks , riverside and forest walks ending with a cliff top section at Filey . 

  The route makes use of sections of the Foss Walk , the Ebor , Derwent and Wolds Ways . 

  From the south transept door of York Minster the Centenary Way goes through York to the western bank of the River Foss , following The Foss Walk . 

  From here to the village of Sherrif Hutton the Way follows the line of the river . 

  The next 12 miles from Sheriff Hutton to Coneysthorpe makes its way via the hamlet of Stittenham over to the village of Terrington . 

  The route then follows the Ebor Way for a stretch before veering off right just before Hollin Hill Plantation . 

  You cross the Slingsby-Castle Howard road to continue to the village of Coneysthorpe . 

  From Coneysthorpe the Way continues south to Kirkham Priory and then north-east to Low Hutton , following the River Derwent up to the town of Malton . 

  This section covers about 13 miles . 

  From Norton Road in Malton the next 12 miles of the route continues into Norton , down to the village of Settrington and south to North Grimston . 

  After going to the village of Birdsall the route heads to Thixendale . 

  From Thixendale to Sherburn the route travels around 17 miles , first north to Wintringham past the deserted medieval village of Wharram Percy . 

  It then goes east , just south of the line of the A64 to Sherburn . 

  The Wolds Way is followed for part of the route . 

  The last 16 miles of the Centenary Way run east to the town of Hunmanby and then north-east to Filey Brigg . 

  A booklet giving a detailed description of the Centenary Way is available by sending an sae to : The County Surveyor , . 

  It costs 1 . 

  Recommended by Yorkshire and Humberside Tourist Board . 

  NANTLLE RIDGE WALK 

  This is a strenuous route along a fine ridge in Snowdonia giving impressive views over the surrounding mountains . 

  The walk starts from the Rhyd-Dhu car park off the A4085 . 

  From here you cross the road and go through an iron gate following the path west to pass a cottage and over a bridge . 

  Walk north-west to reach the B4418 and take the path going south-west until you reach the rock painted with white arrows . 

  Follow the path west passing over a high stile and making a steep ascent to the summit of Y Garn . 

  From here there are good views of Snowdon to the north-east . 

  Walk south along the ridge and scramble to the top of Mynydd Drws-y-coed . 

  Still keeping to the ridge descend a little and then curve around west to reach Trum y Ddysgl and go south-west on grass and descend again to reach the summit of Mynydd Tal-y-mignedd . 

  Here you shall find a very tall obelisk . 

  From the top of Mynydd Tal-y-mignedd descend south on the grass until the path starts to get steep ( 534-509 ) . 

  Then leave the path to descend steeply south-east , curving left at the bottom of the slope to reach the old mine ( 541 505 ) . 

  Follow the wall and indistinct path south-east to reach the bridle path at Bwlch-y-ddwy-elor . 

  Go through the forest in a north-easterly direction and when the forest road turns east , carry on going north-east . 

  Cross the stream until you reach the path you used at the start and retrace your steps to the car park . 

  Recommended by HF Holidays . 

  Contact . 

  BEDD MORRIS 

  This walk climbs to almost 1,000f on the moorland of Parc Mawr . 

  From the start point on the A487 opposite the drive to " Holmwys " take the track nor for 200yds . 

  Turn left and head to Rhigian Cottage , then go right on the path through the wooded valley . 

  Cross the bridge by Aberrhigian Beach and walk along the coast path . 

  Follow the path , taking care on the unstable cliff tops . 

  Walk on to the unstable cliff tops . 

  Walk on to Aberforest Bay and before descending to Aberforest itself , cross a stile near the first white house you reach . 

  Turn left , following the fence and keep to the top of the field . 

  Cross another stile and join the track which turns left . 

  Follow this south to the A487 . 

  A track leads south on the other side of the road , slightly to the right . 

  At the first farm turn left . 

  Go on to Trecadifor Farm and over a cattle grid . 

  Go through a metal gate . 

  Bear left to a wooded gate after 200 yds . 

  Continue up an old lane to a modern farm track . 

  Cross it and go onto the common . 

  Follow the left track across the common . 

  At the Newport/ Pontfaen road turn right . 

  Walk up the road for 100yds to the Bedd Morris stone . 

  Go back down the road . 

  Turn sharp left 80yds before a conifer windbreak . 

  Follow the track down and go straight on to a modern farm track . 

  Turn right and go to the Newport/ Pontfaen road junction . 

  Turn left past the junction and on to a path . 

  Follow this to a stile which you cross . 

  Follow the track to the field keeping to the right . 

  Turn right onto a track , past Hendre Farm and left onto the road back to the start . 

  Recommended by Pembrokeshire National Park . 

  WATERFALLS IN THE VALE OF NEATH 

  This walk takes in seven waterfalls on the rivers Hepste , Mellte and Nedd Fechan in the Vale of Neath . 

  And there's the possibility of a diversion to two more on the Pyrddin . 

  From the Angel Inn at Pont-Nedd-Fechan follow the west bank of the Nedd Fechan . 

  Continue over the iron bridge at the junction with the Pyrddin to reach the Horseshoe Falls and the Lower Ddwli and Upper Ddwli Falls . 

  ( If you've time , do not cross the bridge over the Pyrddin , instead walk west to Sgwd Gwladys and Sgwd Einion Gam Falls . ) 

  The Horseshoe Falls are aptly named as they are shaped in a series of semi-circular ledges . 

  Further on , the Lower Ddwli Falls are particularly impressive when the river is flowing fast . 

  Continue on to reach the road , turn right over it to cross the Nedd Fechan and go to the road junction . 

  Turn left along the road . 

  After around half a mile branch right to cross the Mellte above the Upper Clungwyn Falls . 

  Follow the west bank of the river downstream to pass the very impressive Upper Middle and Lower Clungwyn Falls . 

  Once past the lower falls go round to the left on the north side of the Hepste , to reach the falls of Sgwyd yr Eira . 

  You can easily walk behind this fall . 

  From Sgwyd yr Eira head south to Dinas Rock , staying on the east side of the Mellte and make your way back to Pont-Nedd-Fechan . 

  Recommended by Brecon Beacons National Park . 

  THE SUFFOLK COAST PATH 

  The path runs from Felixstowe to Lowestoft , mainly through the Suffolk Coast and Heaths Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and the Suffolk Heritage Coast . 

  It is not difficult to follow the path and where help is needed there are waymarks of a yellow arrow on a brown background . 

  The path starts at the south end of the coast , at the car park just before the golf club on Cliff Road in Felixstowe . 

  Follow the sea wall past the Martello Towers to the Felixstowe Ferry , which goes to Bawdsey . 

  The path follows the foreshore around RAF Bawdsey and carries on to Shingle Street for around one mile on the road . 

  Follow the river wall parallel to Orfordness . 

  The route cuts inland via Butley Low Corner and Chillesford , through Tunstall Forest and across farmland to the Alde estuary . 

  Follow this to Snape Maltings . 

  From here the path follows the River Alde to join Sailors Path to Aldeburgh . 

  You soon reach Aldeburgh/ Thorpeness beach . 

  The path now follows the coast , going past Thorpeness to Sizewell . 

  From here the route goes to Minsmere Cliffs and cross Dunwich Common . 

  Go through woods to Dunwich . 

  The path then follows the edge of the forest to Dingle Hill , through the marshes of the Walberswick Nature Reserve to the ruins of the Westwood Marsh windpump . 

  Then follow the Dunwich River to Walberswick . 

  At the harbour you can take the foot ferry to Southwold , or walk by the River Blyth to the bridge , returning on the north bank . 

  Take the ferry path and follow the sea front to the pier . 

  From Southwold to Kessingland the path follows the foreshore . 

  Alternative routes at high tide leave the coast at Easton Bavents and Green Heath , Covehithe . 

  North of Kessingland the route follows the cliff path to Pakefield , then on the promenade to Lowestoft . 

  The path finishes by the South Pier . 

  Recommended by Suffolk County Council . 

  CERNE VALLEY AND CERNE GIANT 

  This walk is along part of the Ridgeway National Trail , its highlight the incredible Cerne Giant -- an 180ft outline of a naked man carved out of the hillside . 

  The walk begins in Long Street in Cerne Abbas . 

  Walk towards the church and turn left into Abbey Street . 

  Go right into the churchyard , follow the path to the arched exit and on to the field . 

  Go north to the stile , then up the slope to the fence and National Trust sign . 

  Go north along the lower edge of the fence , around the hillside and up the main path north-east to the summit . 

  Cross the field , pass the barn and continue with the hedgerow on the left to an iron gate ( 673 029 ) . 

  Turn left and head north-west to Minterne Parva Farm . 

  Detour around the farm to rejoin track . 

  At the cottages follow the lane south-west . 

  Turn left on the road to the junction at Port Knap . turn right to Up Cerne . 

  Go south-west on the lane , then right on a stony track up Seldon Hill . 

  Pass the trees and follow the main path west and then north-west . 

  Where the tracks turns right at the woods , walk ahead to the gap in the hedge where the path joins the Ridgeway ( 639 032 ) . 

  Turn left along the Ridgeway and follow it to the TV mast . 

  Turn left with the hedgerow to your right and cross the field to the woods . 

  Turn right to gateway into the woods and descend grassy path to fence and stile . 

  Continue and cross the field to gate , keep the hedgerow on the right . 

  Join the road at 662 018 . 

  Turn right to the Cerne Giant viewing point . 

  Legend has it that a real giant terrorised the locals . 

  When he lay down to sleep the peasants killed him and cut around his outline . 

  From here continue to the junction , ahead for 50yds then turn left to Kettle Bridge . 

  Turn right along the river , left over waterfall to the alley into Abbey St. and back into Long St. 

  Recommended by HF Holidays . 

  RIVER COVE AND ZENNOR QUOIT 

  West of St Ives is a lovely stretch of the South West Peninsula Coast Path . 

  This walk follows the coast path then cuts across country to the 250BC New Stone Age burial remains of Zennor Quoit . 

  Take the road behind Porthmeor Beach to the path past the bowling green . 

  Continue to Clodgy Point and Hor Point . 

  Descend steeply from Hor Point to a stile , then ascend to a squeeze gap . 

  Cross a boardwalk and go to the trig point ( 477 408 ) . 

  Descend to a stone footbridge over a stream ( 473 405 ) . 

  The path going right leads to River Cove -- worth a detour as seals can often be seen here . 

  Cross the bridge and go uphill . 

  After 100yds go left through a wood to a road . 

  Go right to Treveal . 

  From Treveal turn left , follow a farm road to Boscubban , then turn right to Wicca . 

  Cross the stile signed to Zennor and cross fields to Tregerthen . 

  Turn left up a steep road past Higher Tregerthen to the B3306 . 

  Go left for 200yds to a track ( 468 386 ) . 

  Walk south along the track uphill to a building and a faint track going east between low stone walls . 

  After 400yds you see Zennor Quoit to the south . 

  Continue east to a vague track junction near a gate . 

  Pass through for another 100yds . 

  At the next junction turn left , descend the rocky slope and through a gate . 

  Go east to Beagle ton Farm . 

  Go right around building and cross stiles east to Towednack Church . 

  Follow rough road to tarmac road , turn right onto it for 400yds to Cold Harbour and turn left for about half a mile until you reach the B3311 . 

  Go left along the road for 260 yds until you reach the footpath sign . 

  Turn right and cross the field towards Halsetown . 

  Go through gate at the bottom , cross the boggy ground to a stony lane . 

  Go east and take a similar lane north . 

  At the crossroads turn right to cross the Halsetown-Vorvas road by a former chapel ( 508 387 ) . 

  Follow the tarmac road opposite for 70yds and at the right hand bend turn left into the fields . 

  The path leads into a green lane . 

  Turn right to a tarmac road , then left to St Ives and Porthmeor Beach . 

  Recommended by HF Holidays . 

  OUTDOOR PEOPLE 

  Mountain rescue doctor 

  David Allan is a mountain rescue team doctor and the medical officer of the Mountain Rescue Committee 

  " As a mountain rescue doctor my first responsibility is to make sure the other members of the team are as well trained in first aid medicine as possible . 

  If I can get out onto the hill for rescues , then that's good -- but that cannot always be guaranteed with the work commitments you have as a doctor . 

  Sometimes you can give useful medical advice over the radio . 

  I try to get out on the hill for either a call-out or a practice at least once a month with my team -- the Furness Mountain Rescue Team which deals with an area of the southern Lake District . 

  There are also plenty of indoor training sessions where I teach the team , so we see a lot of each other . 

  I've been involved in the mountain rescue world for 14 years . 

  I came to it through climbing , having been active in mountaineering for years . 

  My local mountain rescue team needed a doctor and things have just moved on from there . 

  Most of the call-outs we deal with tend to be at the weekend and at the end of the day when people are tired . 

  Lower limb injuries are behind about 60 per cent of our call-outs and tiredness and unfitness are the major causes . 

  Most of the lower limb fractures we see occur in casual hill users -- perhaps their leg muscles are not attuned to what they're doing . 

  The more serious incidents usually involve head or multiple injuries received in falls . 

  And medical conditions are becoming a serious problem too -- people having heart attacks , asthmatic or epileptic attacks , or diabetic crises . 

  In fact the commonest cause of death on the hill in the last three years in the Lake District has been heart attacks . 

  That's created quite a problem because it's more difficult to teach the lads in the teams how to deal with things like that . 

  One of two of the busiest mountain rescue teams have started taking cardiac monitors out on the hill with them . 

  If we are pretty sure that someone has had a heart attack though , we will whistle up the RAF helicopter to get the casualty straight to the hospital . 

  A lot of the casualties are taken to Furness General Hospital , which is where I work as a consultant surgeon . 

  I do try to give the rescue teams some feedback on the casualties , so that they know whether or not they did the right things . 

  We're alerted to all incidents by the police -- mountain rescue is carried out on behalf of the police , though everyone in the mountain rescue organisation is a volunteer . 

  Once a call has come through from the police the team initiates a " cascade call " system where say , one person is responsible for telephoning six other team members . 

  If the exact location of the incident is known the team members go directly to it . 

  If not they assemble at the team base and go from there . 

  If we know that someone is injured , I as the doctor will go out too . 

  Some of the incidents can be tricky . 

  It is very difficult dealing with fractures and dislocations which have happened on fairly hard rock climbs . 

  Putting someone's shoulder back into place standing on a six inch ledge is quite something . 

  Our task is made easier if people give us as much information as possible when there has been an incident . 

  The exact location is important , as are details of when the accident happened and how far someone has fallen . 

  We need to know the level of consciousness of the casualty and if this has changed . 

  A knowledge of the casualty's background medical history also helps . 

  My involvement with mountain rescue has led to my becoming the medical officer for the Mountain Rescue Committee dealing with England and Wales . 

  This body acts as a guide to all mountain rescue teams . 

  I've been doing this for around six years now . 

  At the moment we're trying to formulate some standard policies on treatment and are trying to resolve problems of obtaining equipment , drugs etc . 

  All mountain rescue medical equipment is paid for by government funding , but this represents only a small percentage of our total costs . 

  Money for everything else has to be raised . 

  So far though it has not been a problem raising money for the sharp end of mountain rescue -- for new ropes or new vehicles and the like . 

  But what we are probably going to be short of is money to improve training and to oversee examinations -- people are reluctant to put money into the administrative side . 

  The mountain rescue organisation is getting bigger and it needs to be sustained -- there has been a very dramatic escalation in the number of incidents on the hill in the last ten years . 

  However , hillwalking is largely safe but there are risks and we have to educate people about these risks if we are going to improve safety . 

  Report by 

  If you would like to make a donation to mountain rescue send cheques or postal orders made payable to Mountain Rescue Committee to : , . 

  Crime , power , and ideological mystification 

  Murder ! 

  Rape ! 

  Robbery ! 

  Assault ! 

  Wounding ! 

  Theft ! 

  Burglary ! 

  Arson ! 

  Vandalism ! 

  These form the substance of the annual official criminal statistics on indictable offences ( or the Crime Index offences in America ) . 

  Aggregated , they constitute the major part of " our " crime problem . 

  Or at least , we are told so daily by politicians , police , judges , and journalists who speak to us through the media of newspapers and television . 

  And most of us listen . 

  We do not want to be murdered , raped , robbed , assaulted , or criminally victimized in any other way . 

  Reassured that our political leaders are both aware of the problem's growing dimensions and receptive to our rising anxieties , we wait in optimistic but realistic anticipation for crime to be at least effectively reduced . 

  But apart from the number of police rapidly increasing , their technological and quasi-military capacities shamelessly strengthened , their discretionary powers of apprehension , interrogation , detention , and arrest liberally extended , and new prisons built or old ones extensively refurbished ( all with money the government claims the country has not got to maintain existing standards of education , health , unemployment welfare , and social services ) , nothing much justifies the optimism . 

  The number of recorded serious crimes marches forever upward . 

  During the decade 1970-80 , serious crimes recorded by the police increased for nearly every category : violence against the person rose by 136 per cent , burglary by 44 per cent , robbery by 138 per cent , theft and handling by 54 per cent and fraud and forgery by 18 per cent . 

  These increases were not merely artefacts of an increased population available to commit serious crimes . 

  For even when the changing population size is controlled statistically , crimes continue to rise . 

  Thus in 1950 , there were 1,094 per 100,000 population . 

  This rose to 1,742 by 1960 , then to 3,221 by 1970 , and reached 5,119 by 1980 . 

  From 1980 to 1981 they rose a further 10 per cent , to reach an all-time record . 

  Ironically , as " our " crime problem gets worse , the demand for even more " law and order " policies increases , even though these are blatantly having no effect on the level of serious crimes . 

  At least not on the level recorded by the police . 

  The result , so we are told , is that the " fear of crime " has now been elevated into a national problem . 

  Techniques for avoiding victimization have become a serious preoccupation : more locks on doors and windows , fewer visits after dark to family , friends , and places of entertainment , avoidance of underground and empty train carriages , mace sprays or personal alarm sirens held nervously in coat pockets , a growing unwillingness to be neighbourly or engage in local collective enterprises , furtive suspicious glances at any stranger , and attempts to avoid any encounter except with the most trusted and close friends . 

  Who are these " villains " driving us into a state of national agoraphobia ? 

  We are told a fairly accurate and terrifying glimpse can be obtained of " our " Public Enemies by examining the convicted and imprisoned population . 

  For every 100 persons convicted of these serious crimes , 85 are male . 

  Amongst this convicted male population , those aged less than 30 years , and particularly those aged between 15 and 21 years are over-represented . 

  Similarly , the educational non-achievers are over-represented -- at the other end of the educational achievement ladder there appear to be hardly any criminals , since only 0.05 per cent of people received into prison have obtained a university degree . 

  The unemployed are currently only ( sic ) 14 per cent of the available labour force , but they constitute approximately 40 per cent of those convicted . 

  Only 4 per cent of the general population are black , but nearly one-third of the convicted and imprisoned population are black . 

  Urban dwellers , particularly inner-city residents , are over-represented . 

  Thus the typical people criminally victimizing and forcing us to fear each other and fracture our sense of " community " are young uneducated males , who are often unemployed , live in a working-class impoverished neighbourhood ; and frequently belong to an ethnic minority . 

  These villains deserve , so " law and order " campaigners tell us ceaselessly in their strident moral rhetoric , either short , sharp , shock treatment , including death by hanging or castration by chemotherapy -- " off with their goolies " -- or long , endless , self-destroying stretches as non-paying guests in crumbling , insanitary , overcrowded prisons constructed for the redemption of lost Christian souls by our Victorian ancestors . 

  If only these ideas were pursued vigorously and with a vengeance morally justified by the offender's wickedness , then " our " society would be relatively crime-free and tranquil . 

  So " law and order " campaigners tell us . 

  It is tempting to call all this hype -- but that would be extreme ! 

  " Conventional " crimes do have victims whose suffering is real ; steps should be taken to understand and control these crimes so that fewer and fewer people are victimized . 

  A radical criminology which appears to deny this will be seen as callous and rightly rejected . 

  Furthermore , those crimes so carefully recorded and graphed in official criminal statistics are more likely to be committed by young males , living in poor neighbourhoods and so on . 

  A radical criminology which appears to deny this will be seen as naive and rightly rejected . 

  Finally , there are very good grounds for believing that the rising crime wave is real -- material conditions for large sections of the community have deteriorated markedly . 

  A radical criminology which remained insensitive of this would be guilty of forgetting its theoretical roots and rightly rejected . 

  So the official portrait of crime and criminals is not entirely without merit or truth . 

  None the less , before galloping off down the " law and order " campaign trail , it might be prudent to consider whether murder , rape , robbery , assault , and other crimes focused on by state officials , politicians , the media , and the criminal justice system do constitute the major part of our real crime problem . 

  Maybe they are only a crime problem and not the crime problem . 

  Maybe what is stuffed into our consciousness as the crime problem is in fact an illusion , a trick to deflect our attention away from other , even more serious crimes and victimizing behaviours , which objectively cause the vast bulk of avoidable death , injury , and deprivation . 

  At the same time , it might be prudent to compare persons who commit other serious but under-emphasized crimes and victimizing behaviours with those who are officially portrayed as " our " criminal enemies . 

  For if the former , compared to the latter , are indeed quite different types of people , then maybe we should stop looking to our political authorities and criminal justice system for protection from those beneath us in impoverished urban neighbourhoods . 

  Instead maybe we should look up accusingly at our political and judicial " superiors " for being or for protecting the " real " culprits . 

  If we do this , we might also cast a jaundiced eye at the view that serious criminals are " pathological " . 

  This has been the favourite explanatory imagery of mainstream positivistic criminology . 

  It was , however , an explanation that only remained plausible if crimes were indeed committed by a minority of individuals living in conditions of relative deprivation . 

  For whilst this was true it was obvious , at least to the conservative mind , that " something must be wrong with them " . 

  However , if we look up rather than down the stratification hierarchy and see serious crimes being committed by the people who are respectable , well-educated , wealthy , and socially privileged then the imagery of pathology seems harder to accept . 

  If these upper- and middle-class criminals are also pathological , then what hope is there for any of us ! 

  Wanting to avoid this pessimistic conclusion , we might instead entertain the idea that these powerful persons commit crimes for " rational " -- albeit disreputable -- motives which emerge under conditions that render conformity a relatively unrewarding activity . 

  Having rescued the powerful from " abnormality " we might do the same for the powerless . 

  Maybe they too are rational rather than irrational , morally disreputable rather than organically abnormal , overwhelmed by adversity rather than by wickedness . 

  If these are the lessons of prudence , then standing back from the official portrait of crime and criminals and looking at it critically might be a very beneficial move towards getting our heads straight . 

  However , there is an agonizing choice to make between at least two pairs of spectacles we might wear to take this critical look . 

  We could wear the liberal " scientific " pair , as did many young trendy academics during the 1960s and early 1970s when the stars of interactionism and phenomenology were in the ascendant . 

  Or we might wear the radical " reflexive " pair , whose lenses have been recently polished to a fine smoothness by those same trendy academics who have now entered a middle-age period of intellectual enlightenment ! 

  These spectacles do provide quite different views on the official portrait of crime and criminals . 

  Liberal " scientism " : partially blind justice 

  One way of getting a clear perspective on those crimes and criminals causing us most harm , injury , and deprivation is to excavate unreported , unrecorded , and non-prosecuted crimes . 

  This can be achieved by sifting evidence from numerous self-reported crime studies and criminal victimization surveys . 

  This is undoubtedly an important exercise for it leads us to reconsider the validity of official criminal statistics and the more extreme pronouncements made directly and uncritically from them . 

  What lessons are there to be learnt from the results of these surveys ? 

  First , there is much more serious crime being committed than the official police records indicate . 

  The emerging consensus is that one serious crime in three ( excluding burglary and car theft ) is reported to the police . 

  This knowledge can and does add fuel to the alarmist " law and order " fire : " it's even worse than we imagined ! " 

  Second , although the official portrait of criminals is not untrue , it is inaccurate . 

  It is more like a distorting mirror ; you immediately recognize yourself , but not quite in a flattering shape and form familiar to you . 

  Thus self-report data indicate that serious crimes are disproportionately committed by the young uneducated males amongst whom the unemployed and ethnically oppressed are over-represented , but the contribution they make is less than the official data implies . 

  There are , it appears , more serious crimes being committed by white , respectable , well-educated , slightly older males and females than we are led to believe ( Box 1981a : 56-93 ) . 

  To the liberal " scientific " mind , there are two problems here of " slippage " , one more slight than the other . 

  Too many people fail to report crimes because they consider the police inefficient ; we need to restore police efficiency in order to increase the reportage rate and hence obtain a better more reliable gauge of crime . 

  The second , more important slippage , is that the administration of criminal justice is fine in principle , but is failing slightly in practice . 

  The police pursue policies of differential deployment ( for example , swamping certain parts of London where the West Indian population is prominent ) and " methodological suspicion " ( that is , routinely suspecting only a limited proportion of the population , particularly those with criminal records or known criminal associates ) . 

  Coupled with these practices are plea-bargaining ( negotiating a guilty plea in return for being charged with a less serious offence ) and " judicious " judicial decisions ( which take as much notice of who you are as they do of what you have apparently done ) . 

  In other words , the police , magistrates , judges , and other court officials have too much discretion . 

  The result is too much " street-justice " , " charge-dealing " , " plea-bargaining " , and " disparate sentencing " . 

  In these judicial negotiations and compromises , the wealthy , privileged , and powerful are better able to secure favourable outcomes than their less powerful counterparts ( Box 1981a : 157-207 ) . 

  This slippage between ideal and practice reveals a slightly disturbing picture . 

  The process of law enforcement , in its broadest possible interpretation , operates in such a way as to conceal crimes of the powerful against the powerless , but to reveal and exaggerate crimes of the powerless against " everyone " . 

  Furthermore , because a substantial section of this criminalized population is stigmatized and discriminated against , particularly in the field of employment , its reproduction is secured ; many of them , out of resentment , injustice , or desperation , turn to more persistent and even more serious forms of crime . 

  This vicious circle increases the over-representation of the powerless in the highly publicized " hardened " criminal prisoner population . 

  The outcome of these processes is that the official portrait of crime and criminals is highly selective , serving to conceal crimes of the powerful and hence shore up their interests , particularly the need to be legitimated through maintaining the appearance of respectability . 

  At the same time , crimes of the powerless are revealed and exaggerated , and this serves the interests of the powerful because it legitimizes their control agencies , such as the police and prison service , being strengthened materially , technologically , and legally , so that their ability to survey , harass , deter , both specifically and generally , actual and potential resisters to political authority is enhanced . 

  To the liberal " scientific " mind , a solution of this second and more important slippage would involve a strict limitation on police and judicial discretion and less stigmatization either by decriminalizing some behaviours , or imposing less incarceration ( Schur 1973 ) . 

  The adoption of these policies would narrow the " official " differential in criminal behaviour between the disreputable poor and the respectable middle-class so that it approximated more closely the actual differences in criminal behaviour -- at least criminal behaviour as defined by the state . 

  Radical " reflexiveness " : artful criminal definitions 

  Although an enormous amount of carefully buried crime can be unearthed by this liberal " scientific " excavation work , we will still be denied an adequate view of those whose crimes and victimizing behaviours cause us most harm , injury , and deprivation . 

  Through radical " reflexive " spectacles , all this excavation work occurs so late in the process of constructing crime and criminals that it never gets to the foundations . 

  Those committed to self-report and victimization surveys do not start off asking the most important question of all : " what is serious crime ? " 

  Instead they take serious crime as a pre- and state-defined phenomenon . 

  But by the time crime categories or definitions have been established , the most important foundation stone of " our crime problem " has been well and truly buried in cement , beyond the reach of any liberal " scientific " shovel . 

  Aware that liberal " scientists " arrive too late on the scene , radicals resolve to get up earlier in the morning . 

  Instead of merely examining how the law enforcement process in its broadest sense constructs a false image of serious crime and its perpetrators , they suggest we should consider the social construction of criminal law categories . 

  This involves not only reflecting on why certain types of behaviours are defined as criminal in some historical periods and not others , but also why a particular criminal law comes to incorporate from relatively homogeneous behaviour patterns only a portion and exclude the remainder , even though each and every instance of this behaviour causes avoidable harm , injury , or deprivation . 

  Some sociologists have pondered these issues and come to the conclusion that criminal law categories are ideological constructs ( Sumner 1976 ) . 

  Rather than being a fair reflection of those behaviours objectively causing us collectively the most avoidable suffering , criminal law categories are artful , creative constructs designed to criminalize only some victimizing behaviours , usually those more frequently committed by the relatively powerless , and to exclude others , usually those frequently committed by the powerful against subordinates . 

  Numerous researchers ( Chambliss 1964 ; Duster 1970 ; Graham 1976 ; Gunningham 1974 ; Hall 1952 ; Haskins 1960 ; Hay 1975 ; Hopkins 1978 ; McCaghy and Denisoff 1973 ; Platt 1969 ; and Thompson 1975 ) have produced evidence consistent with the view that criminal law categories are ideological reflections of the interests of particular powerful groups . 

  As such , criminal law categories are resources , tools , instruments , designed and then used to criminalize , demoralize , incapacitate , fracture and sometimes eliminate those problem populations perceived by the powerful to be potentially or actually threatening the existing distribution of power , wealth , and privilege . 

  They constitute one , and only one way by which social control over subordinate , but " resisting " , populations is exercised . 

  For once behaviour more typically engaged in by subordinate populations has been incorporated into criminal law , then legally sanctioned punishments can be " justifiably " imposed . 

  In a society such as ours , populations more likely to be controlled in part through criminalization , 

  " tend to share a number of social characteristics but most important among these is the fact that their behaviour , personal qualities , and/ or position threaten the social relationships of production ... . 

  In other words , populations become generally eligible for management as deviant when they disturb , hinder , or call into question ... capitalist modes of appropriating the product of human labour ... the social conditions under which capitalist production takes place ... patterns of distribution and consumption ... the process of socialization for productive and non-productive roles ... and ... the ideology which supports the functioning of capitalist society . " 

  ( Spitzer 1975:642 ) 

  However , this argument needs qualification . 

  It does not maintain that all criminal laws directly express the interests of one particular group , such as the ruling class . 

  Clearly some legislation reflects temporary victories of one interest or allied interest groups over others , and none of these may necessarily be identical or coincide with the interests of the ruling class . 

  Yet the above argument does not demand or predict that every criminal law directly represents the interests of the ruling class . 

  It recognizes that some laws are passed purely as symbolic victories which the dominant class grants to inferior interest groups , basically to keep them quiet ; once passed , they need never be efficiently or systematically enforced . 

  It also recognizes that occasionally the ruling class is forced into a tactical retreat by organized subordinate groups , and the resulting shifts in criminal law enshrine a broader spectrum of interests . 

  But these victories are short lived . 

  Powerful groups have ways and means of clawing back the spoils of tactical defeats . 

  In the last instance , definitions of crime reflect the interests of those groups who comprise the ruling class . 

  This is not to assume that these interests are homogeneous and without serious contradictions ( Chambliss 1981 ) . 

  Indeed , it is just the space between these contradictions that subordinate groups fill with their demands for legal change . 

  It might be objected that even though some criminal laws are in the interests of the dominant class and that others which are obviously not in these interests are ineffectively enforced , thus making them dead-letter laws , it still remains true that laws proscribing those types of victimizing behaviours of which we are all too aware and which set the nerve-ends of neo-classical/ conservative criminologists , such as Wilson ( 1975 ) and Morgan ( 1978 ) tingling with fear and loathing , are in all our interests . 

  None of us wants to be murdered , raped , or robbed ; none of us wants our property stolen , smashed , or destroyed , none of us wants our bodies punched , kicked , bitten , or tortured . 

  In that sense , criminal law against murder , rape , arson , robbery , theft , and assault are in all our interests , since in principle we all benefit equally from and are protected by their existence . 

  Without them life would be " nasty , poor , solitary , brutish , and short " . 

  This is all true , but it is not all the truth . 

  For some groups of people benefit more than others from these laws . 

  It is not that they are less likely to be murdered , raped , robbed , or assaulted -- although the best scientific evidence based on victimization surveys shows this to be true ( Hindelang , Gottfredson , and Garofalo 1978 ) -- but that in the criminal law , definitions of murder , rape , robbery , assault , theft , and other serious crimes are so constructed as to exclude many similar , and in important respects , identical acts , and these are just the acts likely to be committed more frequently by powerful individuals . 

  Thus the criminal law defines only some types of avoidable killing as murder : it excludes , for example , deaths resulting from acts of negligence , such as employers' failure to maintain safe working conditions in factories and mines ( Swartz 1975 ) ; or deaths resulting from an organization's reluctance to maintain appropriate safety standards ( Erickson 1976 ) ; or deaths which result from governmental agencies' giving environmental health risks a low priority ( Liazos 1972 ) ; or deaths resulting from drug manufacturers' failure to conduct adequate research on new chemical compounds before embarking on aggressive marketing campaigns ( Silverman and Lee 1974 ) ; or deaths from a dangerous drug that was approved by health authorities on the strength of a bribe from a pharmaceutical company ( Braithwaite and Geis 1981 ) ; or deaths resulting from car manufacturers refusing to recall and repair thousands of known defective vehicles because they calculate that the costs of meeting civil damages will be less ( Swigert and Farrell 1981 ) ; and in most jurisdictions deaths resulting from drunken or reckless people driving cars with total indifference to the potential cost in terms of human lives are also excluded . 

  The list of avoidable killings not legally construed as murder even in principle could go on and on . 

  But the point should be clear . 

  We are encouraged to see murder as a particular act involving a very limited range of stereotypical actors , instruments , situations , and motives . 

  Other types of avoidable killing are either defined as a less serious crime than murder , or as matters more appropriate for administrative or civil proceedings , or as events beyond the justifiable boundaries of state interference . 

  In all instances , the perpetrators of these avoidable " killings " deserve , so we are told , less harsh community responses than would be made to those committing legally defined murder . 

  The majority of people accept this because the state , by excluding these killings from the murder category , has signified its intention that we should not treat them as capital offenders . 

  As the state can muster a galaxy of skilled machiavellian orators to defend its definitions , and has , beyond these velvet tongues , the iron fist of police and military physical violence , it is able to persuade most people easily and convincingly . 

  It may be just a strange coincidence , as Vonnegut often suggests , that the social characteristics of those persons more likely to commit these types of avoidable killings differ considerably to those possessed by individuals more likely to commit killings legally construed in principle as murder . 

  That the former are more likely to be relatively more powerful , wealthy , and privileged than the latter could be one of nature's accidents . 

  But is it likely ? 

  The criminal law sees only some types of property deprivation as robbery or theft ; it excludes , for example , the separation of consumers and part of their money that follows manufacturers' malpractices or advertisers' misrepresentations ; it excludes shareholders losing their money because managers behaved in ways which they thought would be to the advantage of shareholders even though the only tangible benefits accrued to the managers ( Hopkins 1980b ) ; it excludes the extra tax citizens , in this or other countries , have to pay because : ( i ) corporations and the very wealthy are able to employ financial experts at discovering legal loopholes through which money can be safely transported to tax havens ; ( ii ) Defence Department officials have been bribed to order more expensive weaponry systems or missiles in " excess " of those " needed " ; ( iii ) multinational drug companies charge our National Health Services prices which are estimated to be at least , 50 millions in excess of alternative supplies . 

  If an employee's hand slips into the governor's pocket and removes any spare cash , that is theft ; if the governor puts his hand into employees' pockets and takes their spare cash , i. e. reduces wages , even below the legal minimum , that is the labour market operating reasonably . 

  To end the list prematurely and clarify the point , the law of theft includes , in the words of that anonymous poet particularly loved by teachers of " A " level economic history , " the man or woman who steals the goose from off the common , but leaves the greater villain loose who steals the common from the goose " . 

  The criminal law includes only one type of non-consensual sexual act as rape , namely the insertion of penis in vagina by force or threatened force ; it excludes sexual intercourse between husband and wife , no matter how much the latter is beaten by the former to exercise his " conjugal right " ; it excludes most sexual acts achieved by fraud , deceit , or misrepresentation -- thus a man may pose as a psychiatrist and prescribe sexual intercourse as therapy to a " gullible female " , because he knows the law will regard this as acceptable seduction rather than rape ; it excludes men who use economic , organizational , or social power rather than actual or threatened force to overcome an unwilling but subordinate , and therefore vulnerable female ; it excludes the forced insertion of any other instrument , no matter how sharp or dangerous . 

  Thus out of a whole range of " sexual " acts where the balance of consent versus coercion is at least ambiguous , the criminal law draws a line demarcating those where physical force is used or threatened from those where any other kind of power is utilized to overcome a female's resistance . 

  The outcome is that men who have few resources other than physical ones are more likely to commit legally defined rape , whilst those men who possess a whole range of resources from economic patronage to cultural charm are likely to be viewed by the law as " real men " practising their primeval arts-and that is something the majesty of the law should leave alone ! 

  The criminal law defines only some types of violence as criminal assault ; it excludes verbal assaults that can , and sometimes do , break a person's spirit ; it excludes forms of assault whose injuries become apparent years later , such as those resulting from working in a polluted factory environment where the health risk was known to the employer but concealed from the employee ( Swartz 1975 ) ; it excludes " compulsory " drug-therapy or electric-shock treatment given to " mentally disturbed " patients or prisoners who are denied the civilized rights to refuse such beneficial medical help ( Mitford 1977 ; Szasz 1970,1977a , 1977b ) ; it excludes chemotherapy prescribed to control " naughty " schoolboys , but includes physically hitting teachers ( Box 1981b ; Schrag and Divoky 1981 ) . 

  The criminal law includes and reflects our proper stance against " murderous " acts of terrorism conducted by people who are usually exploited or oppressed by forces of occupation . 

  But it had no relevance , and its guardians remained mute ten years ago , when bombs , with the United States' and allied governments' blessing , fell like rain on women and children in Cambodia ( Shawcross 1979 ) , or when the same governments aid and support other political/ military regimes exercising mass terror and partial genocide against a subjugated people ( Chomsky and Herman 1979a , 1979b ) . 

  The criminal law , in other words , condemns the importation of murderous terrorist acts usually against powerful individuals or strategic institutions , but goes all quiet when governments export or support avoidable acts of killing usually against the under-developed countries' poor . 

  Of course there are exceptions -- the Russian " invasion " of Afghanistan was a violation of international law and a crime against humanity . 

  It may well have been , but what about Western governments' involvement in Vietnam , Laos , Cambodia , Chile , El Salvador , Nicaragua , Suez , and Northern Ireland ? 

  Should not they at least be discussed within the same context of international law and crimes against humanity ? 

  And if not , why not ? 

  Thus criminal laws against murder , rape , robbery , and assault do protect us all , but they do not protect us all equally . 

  They do not protect the less powerful from being killed , sexually exploited , deprived of what little property they possess , or physically and psychologically damaged through the greed , apathy , negligence , indifference , and the unaccountability of the relatively more powerful . 

  Of course , what constitutes murder , rape , robbery , assault , and other forms of serious crime varies over historical periods and between cultural groups , as the changes and contradictions within and between powerful interest groups , and the shifting alliances of the less powerful bring about slight and not-so-slight tilts of society's power axis ( Chambliss 1981 ) . 

  But it is not justifiable to conclude from this that criminal law reflects a value-consensus or even results from the state's neutral refereeing among competing interest groups . 

  It is , however , plausible to view criminal laws as the outcomes of clashes between groups with structurally generated conflicting interests , and to argue that the legislators' intention , or if that is too conspiratorial , then the law's latent function , is to provide the powerful with a resource to reduce further the ability of some groups to resist domination . 

  Needless to stress the point , it is a resource eagerly used to punish and deter actual and potential resisters and thereby help protect the established social order ( see Chapter 6 ) . 

  Nothing but mystification 

  Unfortunately for those committed to the radical " reflexive " view , there is nothing but mystification . 

  Most people accept the " official " view . 

  They are very aware and sensitized to muggers , football hooligans , street vandals , housebreakers , thieves , terrorists , and scroungers . 

  But few are aware and sensitized to crimes committed by corporate top and middle management against stockholders , employees , consumers , and the general public ( see Chapter 2 ) . 

  Similarly there is only a fog , when it comes to crimes committed by governments ( Douglas and Johnson 1977 ) , particularly when these victimize Third World countries ( Shawcross 1979 ) or become genocidal ( Brown 1971 , Horowitz 1977 ) , or by governmental control agencies such as the police when they assault or use deadly force unwarrantedly against the public or suspected persons ( see Chapter 3 ) , or prison officers ( Coggan and Walker 1982 ; Thomas and Pooley 1980 ) , or special prison hospital staff when they brutalize and torture persons in their protective custody . 

  Few people are aware how men , who on the whole are more socially , economically , politically , and physically powerful than women , use these resources frequently to batter wives and cohabitees ( Dobash and Dobash 1981 ) , sexually harass their female ( usually subordinate ) co-workers , or assault / rape any woman who happens to be in the way ( see Chapter 4 ) . 

  But we are very aware of female shoplifters and prostitutes , and those poor female adolescents who are " beyond parental control " and in " need of care and protection " , even though this is a gross misrepresentation of female crime and though the relative absence of serious female crime contradicts the orthodox view that crime and powerlessness go hand in hand ( see Chapter 5 ) . 

  Few people become aware of crimes of the powerful or how serious these are , because their attention is glued to the highly publicized social characteristics of the convicted and imprisoned population . 

  It is not directed to the records , files , and occasional publications of those quasi-judicial organizations ( such as the Factory Inspectorate in the UK or the Federal Drug Administration in the US ) monitoring and regulating corporate and governmental crimes . 

  Because of this , people make the attractive and easy deduction that those behind bars constitute our most serious criminals . 

  As this captive audience is primarily young males amongst whom the unemployed and ethnic minorities are over-represented , it is believed that they , and those like them , constitute our " public enemies " . 

  Had the results of self-report/ victimization surveys and the investigations of quasi-judicial agencies been publicized as much as " official criminal statistics " , and had the radical jaundiced and cynical view of criminal definitions been widely publicized , then the mystification produced by focusing exclusively on the characteristics of the prison population would not be so easily achieved . 

  Instead , there would be a greater awareness of how the social construction of criminal definitions and the criminal justice system operate to bring about this misleading image of serious criminals . 

  Definitions of serious crime are essentially ideological constructs . 

  They do not refer to those behaviours which objectively and avoidably cause us the most harm , injury , and suffering . 

  Instead they refer to only a sub-section of these behaviours , a sub-section which is more likely to be committed by young , poorly-educated males who are often unemployed , live in working-class impoverished neighbourhoods , and frequently belong to an ethnic minority . 

  Crime and criminalization are therefore social control strategies . 

  They : 

  ( i ) 

  render underprivileged and powerless people more likely to be arrested , convicted , and sentenced to prison , even though the amount of personal damage and injury they cause may be less than the more powerful and privileged cause ; 

  ( ii ) 

  create the illusion that the " dangerous " class is primarily located at the bottom of various hierarchies by which we " measure " each other , such as occupational prestige , income level , housing market location , educational achievement , racial attributes -- in this illusion it fuses relative poverty and criminal propensities and sees them both as effects of moral inferiority , thus rendering the " dangerous " class deserving of both poverty and punishment ; 

  ( iii ) 

  render invisible the vast amount of avoidable harm , injury , and deprivation imposed on the ordinary population by the state , transnational and other corporations , and thereby remove the effects of these " crimes " from the causal nexus for explaining " conventional crimes " committed by ordinary people . 

  The conditions of life for the powerless created by the powerful are simply ignored by those who explain crime as a manifestation of individual pathology or local neighbourhood friendship and cultural patterns -- yet in many respects the unrecognized victimization of the powerless by the powerful constitutes a part of those conditions under which the powerless choose to commit crimes ; 

  ( iv ) 

  elevate the criminal justice into a " community service " -- it is presented as being above politics and dispensing' justice for all' irrespective of class , race , sex , or religion -- this further legitimates the state and those whose interests it wittingly , or otherwise , furthers ; 

  ( v ) 

  make ordinary people even more dependent upon the state for protection against " lawlessness " and the rising tidal wave of crime , even though it is the state and its agents who are often directly and indirectly victimizing ordinary people . 

  Not only does the state with the help and reinforcement of its control agencies , criminologists , and the media conceptualize a particular and partial ideological version of serious crime and who commits it , but it does so by concealing and hence mystifying its own propensity for violence and serious crimes on a much larger scale . 

  Matza captured this sad ironic " truth " when he wrote : 

  " In its avid concern for public order and safety , implemented through police force and penal policy , the state is vindicated . 

  By pursuing evil and producing the appearance of good , the state reveals its abiding method -- the perpetuation of its good name in the face of its own propensity for violence , conquest , and destruction . 

  Guarded by a collective representation in which theft and violence reside in a dangerous class , morally elevated by its correctional quest , the state achieves the legitimacy of its pacific intention and the acceptance of legality -- even when it goes to war and massively perpetuates activities it has allegedly banned from the world . 

  But that , the reader may say , is a different matter altogether . 

  So says the state -- and that is the final point of the collective representation [ i. e. ideological construction -- author ] . " 

  ( Matza 1969:196 ) 

  For too long too many people have been socialized to see crime and criminals through the eyes of the state . 

  There is nothing left , as Matza points out , but mystification . 

  This is clearly revealed in the brick wall of indignation which flattens any suggestion that the crime problem defined by the state is not the only crime problem , or that criminals are not only those processed by the state . 

  There is more to crime and criminals than the state reveals . 

  But most people can not see it . 

  2 Corporate crime 

  " I can be free only to the extent that others are forbidden to profit from their physical , economic , or other superiority to the detriment of my liberty . " 

  ( mile Durkheim ) 

  Although there have been few studies of public opinion and corporate crime ( Cullen et al . 1982 ; Newman 1957 ; Reed and Reed 1975 ; Rossi et al . 1974 ; Schrager and Short 1980 ; Sinden 1980 ; Wolfgang 1980 ) , they do provide a window on what can best be described as " collective ignorance " . 

  The one indisputable fact these studies revealed is that the majority of those interviewed were not familiar with the extent of , or damage caused by , corporate crime and amongst the " knowledgeable " minority , few were able to define it with any precision . 

  Public awareness of corporate crime has certainly increased recently , but none the less there is still more misinformation and mystification about this type of crime than about " conventional " crime . 

  The root cause(s ) of this collective ignorance is not too difficult to uncover . 

  Corporate crime is rendered invisible by its complex and sophisticated planning and execution , by non-existent or weak law enforcement and prosecution , and by lenient legal and social sanctions which fail to reaffirm or reinforce collective sentiments on moral boundaries . In addition , the type of media to which the majority of people expose themselves under-reports corporate crime , especially in comparison with " conventional " crimes . 

  Popular television crime series , such as Kojak , Minder , The Sweeney , Softly , Softly , Starsky and Hutch , Hill Street Blues , Shoestring , The Professionals , The Gentle Touch , and Z Cars , never focus on corporate criminals , and hardly ever refer to a related but different type of upper-world crime , the white-collar criminal . 

  Even when they deal with upper/ middle class offenders , as in Columbo , it is not because they have committed corporate crimes , but because they have committed the stereotypical conventional crime of murder . 

  A similar ideological one-sidedness holds both for newspapers and films ( Chibnall 1977 ; Cohen and Young 1980 ; Winick 1978 ) . 

  The majority of people are therefore continually exposed to a portrait of crime in which the background consists of murder , rape , robbery , and theft , and the foreground is full of characters mainly drawn from poor , disorganized , lower-class neighbourhoods . 

  No wonder that corporate crime is not viewed by many people , including most criminologists ( ! ) , as a pressing , serious social problem . 

  Whereas public ignorance of corporate crime is understandable , this latitude should not be extended to those criminologists who argue that our professional efforts should be directed , as they have been traditionally , towards street crimes rather than suite crimes . 

  Foremost amongst these " neo-classical/ conservative " criminologists is James Q. Wilson , whose book Thinking About Crime reached the list of American Best Sellers . 

  He considers ( 1975 : xx ) " predatory street crime to be a far more serious matter than consumer fraud , anti-trust violations etc ... because predatory crime ... makes difficult or impossible the maintenance of meaningful human communities " . 

  In two senses , Wilson and other similar-minded authors fail to substantiate their position . 

  First , they fail to discuss empirically the relative seriousness of corporate compared with " conventional " crime . 

  If , objectively , corporate crime is the more serious , in the sense that more people are avoidably killed , maimed , and robbed and that the last of these aggregated far exceeds the value of " conventional " theft , then that in itself would justify prioritizing its study . 

  Second , the majority of those suffering from corporate crime remain unaware of their victimization -- either not knowing it has happened to them or viewing their " misfortune " as an accident and " no one's fault " . 

  But the absence of public apprehension over corporate crime does not justify it being ignored by criminologists ; rather , it should justify creating a publicity campaign to create an awareness of corporate crime . 

  If the bulk of the community are being criminally victimized in ways they do not understand or realize , surely that too is sufficient reason for prioritizing the study of corporate crime . 

  A growing awareness of corporate crime 

  Over forty years ago , Sutherland's ( 1940 , 1945 , 1949 ) contribution to our knowledge and understanding of corporate crime was so significant that it led Mannheim to comment that if there were a Nobel Prize for Criminology , " Sutherland would have been one of the most deserving " ( 1965 : 470 ) . 

  Sutherland demonstrated that corporate crime was widespread and virtually endemic in contemporary national and transnational corporations . 

  It flowed from a degree of social disorganization within these corporations and also from patterns of differential association amongst its higher-level officials . 

  Its cost , in terms of money lost , was unimaginably enormous . 

  Any criminology which did not devote considerable effort explaining and publicizing corporate crime would , in his view , have failed in its scientific duty . 

  Although it is now clear that Sutherland's attempt to fit , indeed squash , corporate crime into his theory of differential association has not proved comfortable , and that his concentration on the economic as opposed to the physical and social effects of corporate crime made his study too one-sided , it none the less did , at the time , constitute a rich legacy to bequeath to criminology . 

  Sadly it was a legacy scorned by its putative beneficiaries . 

  With the exception of some work by disciples of Sutherland ( Clinard 1952 ; Cressey 1953 ; Hartung 1950 ) , the study of corporate crime remained a deserted and neglected area for nearly two decades . 

  And then , following Ralph Nader's ( 1965 ) exposure of the car industry's products as being " Unsafe At Any Speed " , the President's Task Force Report on crime ( 1967 ) , and Watergate's revelation of massive corporate funds being paid illegally to curry political favours and de-stabilize South American democratic governments , there was a renew-ed interest in crimes committed in the good name of major corporations . 

  In his presidential address to the Society for the Study of Social Problems , Wheeler ( 1976 ) claimed that " the patterns of illegal activity that lie at the core of large-scale corporate , industrial society ... have been almost totally neglected " . 

  He partly supported this belief by the fact that of the 3,700 books or articles listed in the two-volume Criminology Index ( Wolfgang , Figlio , and Thornberry 1975 ) which reviews theoretical and empirical work in criminology from 1945 to 1972 , there were only ninety-two , or about 2.5 per cent , dealing with white-collar or corporate crime . 

  And if the former is subtracted on the grounds that crimes against corporations are dissimilar to crimes for corporations , then just over 1 per cent of the listed material referred to corporate crime . 

  He urged his audience to attend to this neglect , for the topic was clearly a pressing social problem . 

  In another presidential address , this time to the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues , Stotland ( 1977 ) spoke on the topic of " white-collar criminals " and argued that although we were beginning to know something about the people who commit white-collar and corporate crime , we ought to intensify our efforts . 

  Towards the end of the decade , these efforts were clearly being made . 

  Five books of readings on corporate , governmental , and powerful crimes have been produced ( Geis and Meier 1977 ; Geis and Stotland 1980 ; Ermann and Lundman 1978 ; Douglas and Johnson 1977 ; Johnson and Douglas 1978 ) . 

  There have been research monographs on corporate crime and law enforcement processes in America ( Clinard and Yeager 1980 ) , Australia ( Hopkins 1978 ) , Britain ( Carson 1981 ; Carson and Martin 1974 ) , and Canada ( Goff and Reasons 1978 ) . 

  In addition there has been a detailed examination of corporate behaviour in the North Sea oilfields ( Carson 1981 ) and transnational pharmaceutical corporations ( Braithwaite 1983 ) . 

  Bequai ( 1978 ) has " summarized the facts " of corporate and white-collar crime , and Conklin ( 1977 ) , Ermann and Lundman ( 1982 ) , and Pearce ( 1976 ) have proposed some theoretical understanding . 

  Finally , just to document the shift in concern about corporate crime , Clinard and Yeager state that : 

  " Of 28 social problems textbooks published between 1964 and 1978 , a total of only 110 pages discussed the importance of large corporations to society ; of these pages only 11 mentioned corporate crime and all but one of these pages were contained in two textbooks published in 1978 . 

  Approximately 96 per cent of all social problems textbooks mentioning , generally briefly , either corporations or corporate crime were published in 1972 or later . " 

  ( Clinard and Yeager 1980:13 ) 

  This all testifies to a growing recognition of corporate crime as a social problem , and a gradual , shocking realization that the victimization rate is higher and causes more suffering than conventional crime . 

  There is also a growing sense of dismay that attempts to contain and control corporate crime are largely absent or ineffectual . 

  However , for us to improve our ability to control corporate crime , it is first necessary to grasp just what it is we might want to control . 

  Corporate crime -- definition and illustrations 

  " Oh , but you who philosophize disgrace 

  and criticize all fears , 

  Bury the rags deep in your face 

  For now's the time for your tears . " 

  ( from " The Lonesome Death of Hattie Caroll " , Bob Dylan ) 

  It is essential to conceptualize as precisely as possible the nature of corporate crime . 

  Clearly , like many other crimes of the powerful , corporate crime is a " legitimate racket " -- to recall Al Capone's famous phrase -- which displays the " triumph of money over conscience " . 

  But it has to be formulated more precisely if it is not to be confused with other crimes which have the dubious distinction of sharing these aphorismic characteristics . 

  For instance , corporate crime is clearly committed for the corporate and not against it . 

  Thus , such crimes as embezzlement and other examples of employee theft will not be included in this discussion of corporate crime . 

  Conklin ( 1977:13 ) suggests the following definition : 

  " Business crime is an illegal act , punishable by a criminal sanction , which is committed by an individual or a corporation in the course of a legitimate occupation or pursuit in the industrial or commercial sector for the purpose of obtaining money or property , avoiding the payment of money or the loss of property , or obtaining business or personal advantage . " 

  Although Conklin is absolutely right to concentrate on the economic dimension of corporate crime , for ultimately it is always about money , it does obscure the fact that in pursuing economic goals there are physical as well as economic impacts , and these are sufficiently important to demand inclusion in any conceptualization . 

  For this reason , Schrager and Short's definition ( 1977 : 409 ) is worth considering : 

  " Organizational crimes are illegal acts of omission or commission of an individual or a group of individuals in a legitimate formal organization in accordance with the operative goals of the organization which have a serious physical or economic impact on employees , consumers or the general public . " 

  A number of points contained in this definition need to be spelt out . 

  It clearly does not fall into the easy trap of arguing that for crime to exist there must first be intention . 

  Any discussion of crime must be cognizant of the fact that serious adverse consequences can and often do follow from being indifferent to the outcome of one's actions ( or inactions ) . 

  To avoid considering these consequences on the grounds that they were not intended is not only to be blind to much human suffering , but also to accept the relative positions of intention compared with indifference on a common-sense hierarchy of immorality . 

  In this conventional hierarchy , it is morally worse to intend harm than to be indifferent whether harm results from one's behaviour . 

  But , as Reiman argues ( 1979 : 60-1 ) this common sense can be turned on its head . 

  If a person intends doing someone harm , it can not be assumed that s/ he displays a disdain towards humanity , although it is clearly directed towards the particular intended victim . 

  However , if indifference characterizes the attitude a person has towards the consequences of his/ her action , then s/ he are indifferent as to who suffers -- it could literally be anybody -- and this does display disdain for humanity in general . 

  In this sense , the intent to harm someone may be less immoral ( or at least no more immoral ) than to be indifferent as to whom is harmed . 

  Evil should not be unrecognized merely because it is as banal as indifference ; indifference rather than intent may well be the greater cause of avoidable human suffering , particularly in the case of corporate crime . 

  Schrager and Short may not go this far , but they are certainly right to stress that corporate crime should be conceptualized so as to include acts of omission as well as the more obvious acts of commission . 

  Second , they stress that the pursuit of organizational goals is deeply implicated in the cause(s ) of corporate crime . 

  But it is important to realize that these goals are not the manifestation of personal motives cast adrift from organizational moorings , neither are they disembodied acts committed in some metaphysical sense by corporations . 

  Rather , organizational goals are what they are perceived to be by officials who have been socialized into the organizational " way of life " and who strive in a highly co-ordinate fashion to bring about collectively their realization . 

  Of course , these strivings to realize organizational goals may become crystallized in standard operational procedures . 

  These confront new employees at all bureaucratic levels as " solid facts " to be learnt and practised rather than queried and altered . 

  Thus the dead hand of the past presses heavily on the head of the present and gives corporate criminals a genuine sense of irresponsibility because they feel the corporation acting through them as mere passive intermediaries . 

  Third , although Schrager and Short's definition directs attention to physical as well as economic consequences of corporate crime , it neglects important victims , namely other corporations and organizations ( Vaughan 1980 ) . 

  Through such corporate crimes as bribing foreign and domestic governmental officials , price-fixing , mergers and take-overs , fraudulent advertising , espionage , and patent violation , some competing corporations are forced into bankruptcy , others' capacity to compete is impaired , and still others are robbed of resources vital to maintaining their market position . 

  Of course , these corporate crimes against other organizations ultimately have human victims , such as shareholders , taxpayers , Third World poor , and so on , but none the less it is important to see that corporations sometimes commit crimes against other corporations because this focuses our attention on a vital factor in the cause of such behaviour -- namely competition under conditions of scarce or diminishing resources and markets . 

  Schrager and Short's definition therefore needs to be amended with the addition " general public and other organizations " . 

  Finally , Schrager and Short focus on " illegal " acts , but they do not stress that this refers to acts punishable by the state regardless of whether they are subsumed under civil , administrative , or criminal law . 

  It is essential however , to make this point strongly . 

  Corporate crime is crime irrespective of whether it is only punishable by an administrative body , or whether it merely violates individuals' civil rights . 

  It might be wondered why much corporate crime is dealt with by administrative agencies rather than criminal courts , but that does not justify excluding corporate acts regulated by administrative agencies from the study of corporate crime . 

  However , does even this wide definition go far enough ? 

  Ought it also to include those forms of deaths , injuries , and economic deprivations which are not as yet covered by criminal , administrative , or civil law , even though they are violations of " human rights " ( Schwendinger and Schwendinger 1975 ) . 

  This clearly raises enormous philosophical and political issues , and may if pushed to an extreme position , risk losing any sympathetic reception for the study and control of corporate crime from those of liberal sensibilities . 

  Consequently this chapter settles on Schrager and Short's amended definition of corporate crime whilst remaining sensitive to those avoidable harmful corporate acts which are excluded . 

  The implications of this will be considered later when the ability of transnational corporations to shape new legislation relating to corporate activities is discussed ; this ability clearly enables corporations to prevent some of the avoidable deaths , injuries , and economic deprivation they cause from being included in new administrative regulations or criminal laws . 

  Before proceeding to estimate the costs of corporate crime , one last distinction needs to be made . 

  In addition to crimes for corporations ( corporate crimes ) and crimes against corporations ( employee crimes ) , there are also criminal corporations . 

  These are corporations deliberately set up , taken over , or controlled for the explicit and sole purpose of executing criminal activity . 

  An example of this is provided by Hopkins ( 1980b ) in his analysis of an oil corporation which was established and run by a single family . 

  He shows how the family used the corporation to execute a series of financial deals which possibly resulted in shareholders of that and other related companies losing over A$22 millions . 

  A recent study of long-term fraud in the United Kingdom ( Levi 1981 ) also documents how companies are set up with the deliberate intention of using them to obtain goods on credit for which payment is never intended to be made . 

  Although the crimes of criminal corporations are clearly serious , they should be kept analytically separate from corporate crime . 

  Of course , such separation may not always be easy when dealing with real events . 

  But none the less , it is better to start off with some conceptual purity or relatively homogeneous phenomenon in order first to describe better the extent of that particular type of crime , second to facilitate its sociological understanding , and finally to evaluate the likely effectiveness of possible control/ regulation proposals . 

  CORPORATE CRIME KILLS 

  Whereas a person involved in the American Mafia could say , quite reasonably , " what's all the fuss about , we only kill each other " , the same could not be said in defence of some corporate crimes . 

  When these result in avoidable death , and they do , then it could be anyone who just happens to be there -- employees , consumers , ordinary citizens . 

  Thus , in September , 1976 , a fire aboard HMS Glasgow , which was at the time under-going repairs in the Swan Hunter shipyard , resulted in the death of eight workers . 

  The fire was the result of the company failing to provide a proper safe environment for such work ( Health and Safety Executive 1980 : 15 ) . 

  Following a hoist accident at the power station Littlebrook Dee , Kent , on I September , 1978 , four people died and five were seriously injured . 

  The cause of this was identified as the company's neglect of safety equipment ( Health and Safety Commission 1980 : 16 ) . 

  In 1972 at Buffalo Creek , West Virginia , 125 people were killed when a carelessly maintained dam burst ( Stern 1976 : 3 ) and at Willow Island , West Virginia , fifty-one people died when a cooling tower collapsed as a result of safety violations ( Kennedy 1978 ) . 

  Early in 1979 , fifty people lost their lives as a result of an explosion aboard the tanker Betelgeuse whilst it was anchored at Bantry Bay in County Cork . 

  An Inquiry headed by an Irish High Court Judge , Mr Justice Declan Costello firmly placed the responsibility for this on two corporations , Total and Gulf , " who deliberately decided not to carry out necessary repair work costing a mere 130,000 because they intended to sell the tanker' ( The Observer 27.7.80 : 2 ) . 

  Similar considerations appear to have preyed on the minds of Ford executives during the early 1970s . 

  According to Dowie ( 1977 ) , this auto-company sold the Pinto model for a period of six years even though they knew from their own test researchers that the product , which had been rushed from design to production in the short period of twenty-five months instead of the planned forty-three , was dangerous . 

  The trouble was the improperly designed fuel tank ; this tended to fracture , particularly after rear-end collisions . 

  Dowie claims that between 500 and 900 burn deaths resulted from ensuing explosions . 

  During the period 1969-79 there were , according to the Department of Energy , 106 fatalities on or around installations in the British sector of the North Sea . 

  According to Carson ( 1981 ) many of these were avoidable and only occurred because safety standards which applied to onshore industries did not apply to offshore installations . 

  In 1976 twenty-six men died in the Scotia mine , which was unsafe and had been the subject of 652 citing-for-violations of safety regulations ( Caudill 1977 ) . 

  And so on ... 

  CORPORATE CRIME INJURES 

  In the early 1960s over 300 consumers suffered adverse side effects from taking the chemical MER/ 29 which was advertised as medically beneficial to heart sufferers . 

  These 300 suffered from a series of various iatrogenic complaints , including occasional disruption of the reproductive system , loss of hair or a change in its colour and texture , and a variety of eye disorders including the development of cataracts . 

  Ungar ( 1973 ) alleges that the test results on which Merrell secured permission from the Federal Drug Administration to market the chemical substance were proven to be " doctored " , thus concealing the extent to which the company knew of the drug's adverse side-effects . 

  But this example of corporate induced injury pales beside one which followed closely afterwards . 

  As a consequence of taking the prescribed drug thalidomide , something like 8,000 pregnant mothers in the United States , Germany , Japan , Britain , Ireland , Sweden , Australia , Canada , Brazil , Italy , and Spain gave birth to monstrously deformed babies . 

  The company which had discovered and later granted licences for the drug , Chemie Grunenthal of Germany , had criminal charges brought against them for deliberately falsifying the test data and concealing the truth about the drug's serious side effects ( Sunday Times Insight Team 1979 ) . 

  Not only are many consumers injured by corporate crime ; thousands of employees too suffer from " accidents " at work ( which are in fact not pure accidents but events which spring directly from the conditions of production and are in that sense avoidable ) or work-induced diseases , such as asbestosis , lung cancer , and mesothelioma . 

  CORPORATE CRIME ROBS 

  For seven years prior to 1961 , twenty-nine electrical corporations , including some of the best known names in the country , such as General Electric and Westinghouse , conspired illegally to fix prices on large , mainly government contracts , so as to avoid competition and hence reap enormous illegal profit ( Geis 1967 ; Smith 1961 ) . 

  In July 1977 , Revco Drug Stores , one of America's largest discount drug chains , was found guilty of computer-generated double-billing schemes that resulted in the loss of over a half-million dollars in Medicaid funds to the Ohio Department of Public Welfare ( Vaughan 1980 ) . 

  A well known Swiss-based pharmaceutical company was suspected by the British government of overcharging the National Health Service for the drug Valium ; their agreement to repay 4.5 millions tacitly admitted guilt but not what proportion of their " extra-legal " profits this sum represented . 

  But these and other financial swindles pale into insignificance when compared to the Equity Funding Scandal ( Blundell 1978 ; Dirks and Gross 1974 ; Soble and Dallos 1974 ) . 

  The directors and executives of Equity Funding simply made up insurance policies to inflate the company's business and hence improve its share prices . 

  When the whistle was finally blown on the crime by a disgruntled ex-employee , thousands of policy-holders and share-holders simply lost all or a substantial part of their savings or expected pensions , amounting to somewhere between two and three billion dollars . 

  All the above examples of deaths , injuries , and economic losses caused by corporate acts are not the antics of one or two evil , or mentally disturbed , or relatively deprived senior employees . 

  Rather they represent the rational choices of high-ranking employees , acting in the corporation's interests , to intend directly to violate the criminal law or governmental regulations , or to be indifferent to the outcome of their action or inaction , even though it might result in human lives obliterated , bodies mangled , or life-savings lost . 

  The physical , economic , and social costs of corporate crime 

  The physical effects of corporate misbehaviour are difficult to quantify precisely . 

  But if what is sought is merely a gross comparison between the damage of corporate and " conventional " crimes , then the current level of official information available provides sufficient facts to get the ratio in perspective . 

  Thus workers die of avoidable industrial diseases and accidents , and it is sobering to compare these with the conventional crime of homicide . 

  Reiman ( 1979 : 75 ) estimates that in 1972 the number of persons in the USA dying from occupational hazards ( diseases and accidents ) was 114,000 , whereas only 20,600 died from being shot , cut , beaten , or poisoned , and being recorded as a homicide case . 

  If there were a time clock for murder , it would show one every twenty-six minutes . 

  But as Reiman so graphically points out : 

  " If a similar crime clock for industrial deaths were constructed ... and recalling that this clock ticks only for that half of the population that is in the labour force -- this clock would show an industrial death about every four and a half minutes ! 

  In other words , in the time it takes for one murder on the crime clock , six workers have died " just trying to make a living " ! " 

  ( Reiman 1979 : 68 ) 

  A similarly disturbing picture emerges if we consider the relevant data for Britain . 

  In the table below ( Table 1 ) , which shows data for the years 1973-79 , the combined number of employees dying from fatal accidents or occupational diseases ( most of which are avoidable if employing corporations obeyed government regulations and designed safe production schedules or paid for hazard-free work environments ) far exceed the number of homicide cases recorded by the police . 

  Furthermore , this comparison becomes even more shocking when it is remembered that the population at risk of being killed at work is less than half those who could be " murdered " . 

  In other words , to obtain an initial fair comparison we would have to multiply the industrial related deaths by at least a factor of two and compare that figure with the number of recorded homicide cases . 

  The result is approximately seven to one ! 

  But even this ratio puts the best possible light on the contribution made by employment to the avoidable death toll . 

  For although we can be fairly sure that the recorded homicide figure is reasonably valid , we can not have the same confidence in the data on occupationally related deaths . 

  The cause of death is frequently ambiguous and pinning it down to occupational environments , which may have been experienced years or even decades ago , is clearly no easy matter . 

  Furthermore , in the processes of socially constructing the cause(s ) of death , there are considerable social forces directed towards minimizing the number of deaths certified as occupationally induced . 

  Since such fatalities are frequently avoidable , each one is an indictment of corporate practices , and consequently wherever pressure can be brought to bear , either in the process of recognizing a fatal disease-causing work condition or in the enforcement practices , corporate officials will lean towards favouring those definitions and arrangements which minimize the recording of deaths as arising from occupational hazards . 

  Thus executives have successfully prevented most forms of cancer from being included in the list of occupationally-induced illness , even though the documentation on carcinogenic work environments is substantial ( Epstein 1979 ) . 

  In the endeavour to minimize the contributions work environments make to avoidable fatalities , state officials also play a significant part . 

  They will probably err on the side of caution whenever attempting to unravel the cause of death because recording it as occupationally induced requires the subsequent payment of industrial death benefits . 

  Evidence consistent with this view came to light recently whilst Yorkshire TV was making a documentary on asbestos . 

  It discovered " that death certificates often do not mention asbestos diseases even when the coroner has conclusive and documented evidence that they were the cause of death . 

  As a consequence , spouses and relatives have been prevented from claiming compensation " ( Cutler 1982 ) . 

  These two forces tend to depress the level of recorded occupationally induced death below a level it would be otherwise . 

  Therefore , to re-echo Reiman : you stand more chance of being killed avoidably at work than in any other sphere of your life , including being at home ! 

  But do not feel safe staying at home ! 

  The long arm of the corporation's grim reaper is not deterred by such agoraphobic precautions . 

  Consumers may be poisoned in their beds by improperly tested medical drugs , they may be killed over their dinner tables by unhygienically prepared food , they may be blown up to God knows where by the neighbourhood chemical complex exploding , and they may become fatally diseased in their living rooms by industrial pollution . 

  For example , a recent chilling national survey of pollution and its chronic effects on the lives and deaths of American citizens concluded that approximately 9 per cent of all deaths , that is , 140,000 a year , may be attributable to air pollution . 

  It was because of this shocking rate of avoidable death that the British Society for the Social Responsibility of-Science published Asbestos -- Killer Dust in 1979 . 

  In this report , it accused the asbestos industry of deliberately pursuing profit in the face of known dangers , and " in the light of the damage done to people working in the industry and likely to occur in the future , ... it is simply incredible " that nothing much is done about it . 

  It concluded that those responsible should be treated like criminals who allow dangerous cars on the road . 

  But it is clear from the Asbestos Advisory Council's latest Report ( 1980 ) that this will not happen , so they remain , in Swartz's ( 1975 ) chilling words , " silent killers at work " , far more deadly than the phantom killer of the opera . 

  But unfortunately this is not how most people see it . 

  When they think of mass murderers , they normally think of one person killing unlawfully a handful of other people . 

  But when many people die from known carcinogenic work-conditions or their employer's refusal to put right unsafe equipment , machinery , or buildings , this is normally seen as a " disaster " , even though their deaths were easily avoidable . 

  In the case of asbestos for example , there has been a voluminous medical literature on its direct link with asbestosis , lung cancer , and mesothelioma . 

  Of course employers can claim unawareness of obscure medical journals . 

  But during a series of lawsuits against Johns-Manville , Pittsburgh Corning , and other asbestos manufacturers , it was revealed that they did know directly from their own scientific researchers whose implicatory findings were sup-pressed ( Ermann and Lundman 1982 : 68-9 ) . 

  Table 1 Homicides finally recorded by the police compared with fatal occupational accidents and deaths from occupational diseases , England and Wales , 1973-79 

  Maybe the only , but significant difference between the two is that corporate crimes " kill more people than are murdered by acts that come to be listed as criminal homicide in the ( American ) Uniform Crime Rates " ( Geis 1975 : 93 ) . 

  On the occasions when corporate negligence , indifference , or apathy does not result in employees , consumers , or the public being killed , it often leaves them seriously injured or ill . 

  Thus in Britain from 1973 to 1979 there was an annual average of 330,000 non-fatal accidents at work . 

  The vast bulk of these were not caused by employees' carelessness or stupidity but by the conditions under which they are obliged to work . 

  These put pressure on employees to take risks -- even violating the corporation's own safety standards . 

  But in this contradiction between productivity and safety , between speed and conformity to regulations , which does the corporation prioritize ? 

  A clear answer is given in Carson's ( 1981 ) analysis of the other price paid for North Sea oil . 

  He claims that when oil companies were faced with the contradictory demand for speedy exploration and extraction and the requirements of safety they , with successive British governments' blessing , chose speed . 

  Consequently most accidents , and there were nearly 500 of them during the 1970s , were not the result of employee thoughtlessness but emerged directly out of the contradictory demands made upon the workforce . 

  Also during the period 1973-79 , there was an annual average of nearly 14,000 persons diagnosed as suffering from an occupationally induced disease . 

  The number of persons injured or made ill at work far exceeds the number against whom indictable crimes of violence , including rape and indecent assault , were committed . 

  Thus in 1977 over 340,000 persons at work in the UK suffered through accidents and occupationally-induced ill health compared with 93,500 persons victimized by indictable crimes of violence . 

  If we multiply the former figure by a factor of two to obtain a roughly comparable population at risk size , we arrive at a ratio of seven to one in favour ( sic ) of work-induced avoidable suffering . 

  The magnitude of this ratio , rather than the exact validity of the aggregate figures on which it is based , ought to be stressed , for it reveals just how much more objective damage is caused to persons at work than members of the public experience through " conventional " criminal violence . 

  But even these comparisons understate the excessive amount of corporate-induced death and suffering because they omit any reference to consumers physically harmed by the sale of improperly researched substances , dangerous or poisonous products , and so on , or citizens physically harmed through industrial air pollution . 

  According to the American National Commission on Product Safety ( 1971 : 1 ) approximately 20 millions out of a total population of over 250 million are seriously injured annually by consumer products , with 110,000 resulting in permanent disability and 30,000 resulting in death . 

  And according to the American National Cancer Institute , one of the major causes of lung cancer is " neighbourhood air pollution from industrial sources of inorganic arsenic " ( Reiman 1979 : 78 ) . 

  Other types of cancer were also found to be higher in geographical areas where chemical plants were situated . 

  So if consumer and citizen avoidable death and injury were added to workers avoidably killed and injured , then the ratio between corporate criminal violence and " conventional " criminal violence would clearly put the former in an extremely unfavourable light . 

  Indeed , it would be seen as a major source of avoidable and illegal human suffering . 

  This conclusion should not be seen to reflect callous indifference to individuals who have suffered miserably or fatally at the hands of persons committing " conventional " crimes ; their agony is real and should never be ignored . 

  But neither should we enable this sympathy to blind us to the greater truth that more persons suffer , many fatally , from corporate crime than " conventional " crime . 

  If we are to prioritize the study and publicization of one , surely it should be that which , in objective terms , causes more human suffering rather than the other which is perceived by the public to be the more serious even though they are clearly wrong . 

  In Pretty Boy Floyd , Woody Guthrie caught poetically the awesome and terrifying instrument through which corporate officials economically harm others . 

  He wrote : 

  " Now as through this world I ramble , 

  I see lots of funny men , 

  Some rob you with a six gun , 

  And some with a fountain pen . " 

  This irony was not lost on a US judge . 

  " In our complex society " , he said , " the accountant's certificate and the lawyer's opinion can be instruments for inflicting pecuniary loss more potent than the chisel or crowbar " ( Morgenthau 1969:17 ) . 

  Robbing others , directly or indirectly , is a major form of corporate criminal activity . 

  Price fixing ( Geis 1967 ; Smith 1961 ) and illegal monopoly pricing ( Klass 1975 ) both mean that customers pay more than they would under competitive conditions ; bribing corrupt officials ( Braithwaite 1979b ; Jacoby , Nehemlis , and Ells 1977 ) may mean reducing competitors' profit margins or even driving them into bankruptcy ; illegal mergers and take-overs and other shady financial manoeuvres may result in many shareholders being defrauded ( Hopkins 1980b ) ; misleading advertising as well as trimming production costs may result in customers buying goods whose quality fails totally to match manufacturers' glossy claims , thus leaving a swindled consumer population ( Moffit 1976 ) ; corporate tax evasion and avoidance may mean more average taxes paid by individual members of the public ( Vanick 1977 ) . 

  Given the relative invisibility of these crimes , even to those victimized , the fact that they are infrequently reported to or detected by relevant authorities , the absence of any centralized data-collecting agency , and the inconsistent publication of those that are collected , it is impossible to quantify with any accuracy just how serious corporate crime is in economic terms . 

  Furthermore , the figures involved are so astronomic as to be literally incomprehensible . 

  The public understands more easily what it means for an old lady to have five pounds snatched from her purse than to grasp the financial significance of 25 million customers paying one penny more for orange juice diluted beyond the level permitted by law . 

  The public tend to focus more on the one penny than on the quarter of a million illegal profit and conclude that the incident is insignificant . 

  But it is not . 

  There have been attempts to estimate the economic cost of corporate crimes and render these in a meaningful fashion ( Bequai 1978 : 1 ; Clinard 1978 : 83-102 ; Conklin 1977 : 2-8 ; Geis 1975 : 95-7 ; Hills 1971 : 167-68 ; McCaghy 1976 : 205 ; President's Task Force Report 1967 : 47-51 ; Stotland 1977:180-82 ) . 

  Although authors have arrived at different figures , thus reflecting the inherent difficulty and speculative nature of the task involved , they have been unanimous in one conclusion : persons are deprived of far more money by corporate crimes than they are by ordinary economic crimes , such as robbery , theft , larceny , and auto-theft . 

  Conklin ( 1977 : 4 ) estimates that in 1977 these four offences in the USA accounted for between $3-4 billions compared with the annual loss of around $40 billions resulting from various white-collar crime , of which consumer fraud , illegal competition , and deceptive practices account for at least half . 

  Johnson and Douglas ( 1978 : 151 ) point out that the Equity Funding scandal , " perhaps one of the largest securities and investment frauds ever perpetuated on the American public , ... involved more losses than the total losses of all street crime in the US for one year " . 

  In a similar vein , Geis ( 1978 : 281 ) writes that " the heavy electrical equipment price-fixing conspiracy alone involved theft from the American people of more money than was stolen in all of the country's robberies , burglaries , and larcenies during the years in which the price fixing occurred " . 

  Whether we are consumers or citizens , we stand more chance of being robbed by persons who roam corporate suites than we do by those who roam public streets . 

  Furthermore , in the aggregate we stand to be robbed of far more by these fine gentlemen acting in the good name of their corporation than by the common rogues apparently acting from some morally worthless motive . 

  Finally , there are the social consequences of corporate crime compared with " conventional " crime . 

  A number of writers have recently argued very strongly that the latter is more corrosive to social life . 

  Thus Wilson writes : 

  " Predatory crime does not merely victimize individuals , it impedes and , in the extreme case , even prevents the formation and maintenance of community . 

  By disrupting the delicate nexus of ties , formal and informal , by which we are linked with our neighbours , crime atomizes society and makes of its members mere individual calculators estimating their own advantage , especially their own chances for survival amidst their fellows . 

  Common undertakings become difficult except for those motivated by a shared desire for protection . " 

  ( Wilson 1975 : 21 ) 

  And echoing this sentiment , a British criminologist claims : 

  " If the cities are to be saved as centres of a civilized urban life , and not plunged into gutted and fearful waste-lands ... delinquency will have to be tackled as a problem with high priority -- perhaps as the urban problem . 

  City life can not exist without security in its open spaces , some unarmed trust and reciprocity . 

  In Britain ... there is a mass exodus of skilled workers and middle class groups from the metropolis and other inner cities ... these areas are left with heavily welfare-dependent populations ; the old , the sick , the handicapped , the uneducated , the dull , the retarded , and the unskilled . 

  What is not realized ... is that although the movement from the cities has many other long-term causes , delinquency has now ceased to be merely a symptom of urban breakdown ( if it ever was ) ... and has become a major contributor to it . " 

  ( Morgan 1978 : 21 ) 

  Furthermore , she argues that unless some inroad is made now into reducing or containing the problem of street crime , the loss of community will spread outwards , like a cancerous growth , to desirable middle-class areas in the city . 

  At an abstract level , these arguments are probably true . 

  Beyond historically determined levels of societal tolerance , crime is dysfunctional to social life . 

  But the issue is , on which type of crime ought we to be concentrating ? 

  Surely the deleterious consequences street crime has on our sense of community pale beside the way in which corporate crime fractures the economic and political system . 

  Thus Conklin , reiterating the President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice , writes that : 

  " such offences " are the most threatening of all -- not just because they are so expensive , but because of their corrosive effect on the moral standards by which American business is conducted " . 

  Business crimes undermine public faith in the business system because such crime is integrated with " the structure of legitimate business " . 

  Such crime reduces willingness to engage in commercial transactions . 

  Stock manipulations and frauds undermine the capitalist system , which requires public investment for capital . 

  The discovery of fraud through adulteration and mislabelling of grain which is shipped abroad has created distrust among foreign businessmen who purchase grain from American companies . " 

  ( Conklin 1977 : 7 ) 

  Writing on another type of corporate crime , Braithwaite argues that : 

  " Bribery and corruption by large corporations are most serious forms of crime because of their inegalitarian consequences . 

  When a governmental official in a Third World country recommends ( under the influence of a bribe ) that his country purchase the more expensive but less adequate of two types of aircraft , then the extra millions of dollars will be found from the taxes sweated out of the country's impoverished citizens . 

  For a mass consumer product , the million dollar bribe to the civil servant will be passed on in higher places to the consuming public . 

  While it is conceivable that bribes can be used to secure the sale of a better and cheaper product , the more general effect is to shift the balance of business away from the most efficient producer and in favour of the most corrupt producer . 

  The whole purpose of business-government bribes is after all , the inegalitarian purpose of enticing governments to act against the public interest and in the interests of the transnational . 

  Every act of political corruption rewards corruptibility in politics and exacerbates the social selection into public office of those who are most adeptly corrupt . 

  To the extent that politics and government administration become more corrupt , then to that extent will men and women of high principle find entry into politics repugnant . 

  Transnational corporate corruption is therefore perhaps the most pernicious form of crime in the world today because it involves robbing the poor to feed the rich , and brings into political power rulers and administrators who in general will put self-interest ahead of the public interest , and transnational corporation interest ahead of national interest . " 

  ( Braithwaite 1979b : 126 ) 

  Whether one agrees with the sentiments expressed by Wilson and Morgan on the one hand or the President's Commission and Braithwaite on the other is not a matter of blind prejudice , but of weighing carefully the relevant evidence . 

  From the evidence presented above -- and this is merely illustrative of the evidence available -- it should be clear that corporate crime ought to be a prioritized concern because it is the more serious . 

  This concern should focus first on understanding " how it is possible " for corporate crime to be endemic in our " law and order " society , and second , and hopefully flowing from this understanding , " how can it be contained or regulated ? " 

  But before proceeding , a caveat needs to be made . 

  Prioritizing corporate crime has to be set in context . 

  It has been neglected relative to the study of conventional/ street crime . 

  To argue now for its prioritization means no more than demanding as much attention be given to it as there is to street crimes . 

  There is no concealed value judgement here that street crimes are less of a social problem , particularly if the degree of fear and apprehension experienced by the majority of citizens is considered . 

  Citizens in inner-city areas are desperately worried and rightly so , about street crime . 

  That terrain , so proudly occupied by the radical Right's law and order campaigners , has to be won back , and Ian Taylor's ( 1982 ) recent attempt , following earlier sorties of Platt ( 1978 ) represents the appropriate move from the Left . 

  But whilst the law and order debate ebbs and flows over the political terrain , there is a strategic need to establish a second front where radical criminology takes on corporate crimes and crimes of other powerful institutions and privileged people . 

  Explaining corporate crime 

  " The greatest evil is not now done in those sordid " dens of crime " that Dickens loved to paint . 

  It is not done even in concentration camps and labour camps . 

  In those we see its final result . 

  But it is conceived and ordered ( moved , seconded , carried and minuted ) in clean , carpeted , warmed and well-lighted offices , by quiet men with white collars and cut fingernails , and smooth-shaven cheeks who do not need to raise their voices . 

  Hence , naturally enough , my symbol for Hell is something like the offices of a thoroughly nasty business concern . " 

  ( C. S. Lewis , The Screwtape Letters and Screwtape Purposes ) 

  ORGANIZATIONS ARE CRIMINOGENIC 

  Merton's ( 1938 ) attempt to explain crime as a response to anomie -- the disjuncture between cultural goals of success and legitimate opportunity structures through which success might be realized -- has been reproduced over 110 times , a fact which in itself testifies to the importance of this analysis . 

  Because of , rather than despite its fame , it has been subjected to a prolonged critical attention ( Clinard 1964 ; Lemert 1967 ; Taylor , Walton , and Young 1973 ; Thio 1975 ) . 

  Among the various criticisms of Merton's analysis one is particularly relevant to any discussion of corporate crime . 

  Anomie only offers a plausible account of deviant motivation if the cultural goal of success is as unidimensional as Merton suggests and if the pursuit of this goal is prevalent amongst those with blocked legitimate opportunities . 

  Many critics point to empirical evidence which fails to support these conditional clauses . 

  They argue that industrialized societies are characterized by a plurality of cultural goals and these vary systematically among individuals in different strata and many individuals in the lower strata have limited and realistic ambitions . 

  This makes the simple characterization in Merton's analysis unacceptable , at least as a motivational account of why lower-class persons might commit crimes . 

  This criticism would not be valid if anomie analysis were applied to corporate crime . 

  For the one characteristic organization theorists ( Blau and Scott 1962 ; Etzioni 1961 ; Parsons 1963 ) agree on is that corporations , like all organizations , are primarily orientated towards the achievement of a particular goal -- profit -- at least in the long run . 

  In the short run , other goals , such as growth through acquisition or increased market share may be emphasized . 

  Diversification , particularly into potentially competing industries might become a preferred short-term stratagem . 

  For instance , the American oil industry has fairly recently expanded into the solar , sea , and wind energy industries so that in the long run competition between alternative forms of energy can be regulated . 

  Finally , vertical expansion so that suppliers can be controlled may also be a short-run goal . 

  But in the final instance , these short-run goals are pursued with a green glinted eye focused on long-run profitability . 

  This defining characteristic -- it is a goal-seeking entity-makes a corporation inherently criminogenic , for it necessarily operates in an uncertain and unpredictable environment such that its purely legitimate opportunities for goal achievement are sometimes limited and con-strained . 

  Consequently , executives investigate alternative means , including law avoidance , evasion , and violation and pursue them if they are evaluated as superior to other available strictly legitimate alternatives . 

  Environmental uncertainties for a corporation are so numerous as to defy classification , but none the less , there are five important sources of problems which potentially interfere with a corporation's ability to achieve its goal(s ) easily without bending , evading , or breaking legal regulations . 

  These sources are : 

  Competitors -- technological breakthroughs ; price structure ; marketing techniques ; mergers ; new or expanding markets ; 

  Governments -- extending regulations to cover more corporate activities either through new laws or tougher enforcement of existing laws ; 

  Employees -- any collusive activity , but especially those joining trade unions pursuing " militant " wage settlements and making " radical " demands on altering conditions of work/ employment ; 

  Consumers -- especially when demand for product is elastic and consequently fickle , or when " consumerism " is prevalent and making highly visible any dubious corporate practice ; 

  Public -- especially through a growing " environmentalist " sensitivity to conserving fresh air , clean countryside , and natural resources . 

  The contradictions between corporate goal-achieving behaviour and each of these environmental uncertainties creates a strong strain towards innovative behaviour which can stretch over the spectrum law abiding -- law avoiding -- law evading -- law breaking . 

  Examples of the last possibility can be associated with each of these environmental uncertainties . 

  Thus : 

  Competitors -- espionage , arson , patent copying ; bribery and corruption to influence those in new or expanding markets , such as government officials in developing economies ( Braithwaite 1979b ; Jacoby , Nehemlis , and Ells 1977 ) ; price-fixing to squeeze out new competitors or to rationalize competition ( Fuller 1962 ; Geis 1967 ; Smith 1961 ) ; mergers or take-overs in violation of anti-monopoly legislation ( Snider 1978 ) . 

  Governments -- tax evasion through to avoidance especially for transnational corporations ( Vanick 1977 ) ; illegal campaign funds to politicians in return for promises ( Chambliss 1978 ) ; bribing state officials in return for later lucrative employment ; fraudulent information to prevent , influence , or repeal legislation ( Schrag and Divoky 1981 : 94-127 ; Sunday Times Insight Team 1979 : 90-116 ; Ungar 1972 ) ; exporting illegal behaviour to another state where it is not illegal ( Braithwaite 1979b ) ; fraudulent billing of government body ( Klass 1975 ; Vaughan 1980 ) . 

  Employees -- pay less than legal minimum wage ; non-recognition and harassment of trade unions ( Krisberg 1975:44 ; Pearce 1976:97-100 ; Weiss 1978 ) ; refusal to make work conditions safe or properly inspected/ maintained ( Ashford 1976 ; Swartz 1975 ) . 

  Consumers -- fraudulent advertising , misleading sales behaviour ; false labelling of products ( Rothschild and Thorne 1976 ; Schrag 1971 ; Moffit 1976 ) ; manufacture and distribution of untested and dangerous products ( Dowie 1977 ; Vandivier 1972 ; Sunday Times Insight Team 1979 ) ; exportation of products which are safe and healthy in one cultural environment but poisonous in another ( Muller 1974 ; Chetley 1979 ) ; selling adulterated goods ; selling goods at " over-inflated prices " ( Monopolies and Mergers Commission 1980 ) . 

  Public -- pollution of air and land ; depletion of scarce resources ; increased tax bill ( because of corporate tax avoidance schemes ) ; refusal to make safe areas of contact between corporation and public ( Stern 1976 ) ; bribery and corruption to undermine the democratic process ( Braithwaite 1979b ; Ermann and Lundman 1982:106-26 ) . 

  From the above argument a simple hypothesis can be inferred : when these environmental uncertainties increase so the strain towards corporate criminal activity will increase . 

  Of course other factors will need to intervene to transform this motivational strain into actual behaviour ; that they frequently do intervene can be judged from the following research . 

  Staw and Szwajkowski attempted to test the following hypothesis : " when the organization is located within a scarce environment , one method of coping with intra- and extra-organizational demands may be to perform activities which are legally questionable ... the more scarce the environment of a business organization , the more likely it will engage in activities which are considered unfair market practices or restraints of trade " ( 1975 : 346-47 ) . 

  Their dependent variable constituted 105 large companies ( drawn from the 500 largest firms in the US ) which during the period 1968-72 were involved in trade litigation for committing , or having being accused of committing , one or more of the following : price discrimination , tying arrangements , refusal to deal , exclusive dealing , franchise violation , price fixing , foreclosure of entry , reciprocity , allocation of markets , monopoly , conspiracy , and illegal mergers and acquisitions . 

  Their independent variable consisted of the firm's financial performance , particularly return on equity and return on sales compared with the remaining non-litigated top 500 firms . 

  The results of their analysis strengthens their belief that " environmental scarcity does appear to be related to a range of trade violations " ( Staw and Szwajkowski 1975 : 353 ) . 

  It appears therefore that these types of corporate crime serve not only to reduce environment uncertainty but point to resource procurement ( i. e. grabbing more ) as a particularly important organizational source of motivation to commit these crimes . 

  BRINGING CUNNING PEOPLE IN TO DO THE DIRTY WORK 

  " The Lilliputians look upon fraud as a greater crime than theft , and therefore seldom fail to punish it with death ; for they allege that care and vigilance , with a very common understanding , may preserve a man's goods from theft , but honesty has no defence against superior cunning . " 

  ( from Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels ) 

  Although corporate crime represents an attempt to resolve some contradictions between pursuing a limited number of organizational goals and environmental constraints , it is an attempt initiated and implemented by individuals . 

  Organizations per se do not plan , think , or act ; there are human agents eagerly willing to accomplish these in its good name . 

  Consequently , whilst corporate crime can not be understood without grasping the fact that it stems from contradictions between a corporation's goal(s ) and its environment , that understanding remains one-sided if individuals are left out of the analysis . 

  Traditionally , individuals have been the central feature of attempts to understand corporate crime , but unfortunately for criminology , it was their pathological characteristics which were advanced as the cause of their deviations . 

  Consequently , the unity between organizational demands and officials' behaviour was fractured and until this was healed , understanding corporate crime remained crippled . 

  As the vast bulk of corporate crime is initiated ( if not always implemented ) by high-ranking officials , two processes need to be considered : ( i ) whether factors associated with upward mobility in corporations are inherently criminogenic ; and ( ii ) whether the social-psychological consequences of success within a corporation are criminogenic . 

  Stotland ( 1977 ) drew a portrait of the executive's motives for being prepared to go along with corporate crime . 

  He argued that these were : a desire to secure career advancement or at least not prejudice career chances ; a willingness to push matters in order to measure his own cleverness and particularly dexterity at getting around the rules ; to experience the satisfaction which comes from having the power that goes both with high corporate status and criminally victimizing other organizations or persons ; a need to maintain his position within the peer group or family network . 

  However this sketch hardly rises above a " Dallas'-type description and Stotland failed to provide any empirical grounding for his arguments . 

  Furthermore , it offered only a static picture of the corporate executive and fails to visualize him as caught in and conditioned by organizational processes of career advancement . 

  To move beyond this inadequate description , Gross ( 1978 ) argued that we should analyse the social characteristics of corporate criminals first by visualizing what qualities these organizational positions demand , and second by considering whether younger corporate officials who preen themselves to fit this image are more likely to succeed in their career . 

  In other words , we should examine in detail the career mobility patterns within and between corporations , for those who succeed are more likely to have just those qualities which corporate crime requires . 

  Gross examined over one dozen research projects on corporate career mobility and was able to discern some " distinctive features " of those who attain " top positions " . 

  They had fought their way to the top , often against strong competition -- their ambition , and not their meekness , enabled them to inherit the heavenly positions of top management . 

  They were not so much intelligent as shrewd -- their organizational sense enabled them to sniff out the golden chance and grasp it firmly , it enabled them to strain forward rather than stand back waiting passively to be asked . 

  They had the moral flexibility to meet shifting organizational demands and still enjoy the sleep of the just -- their ability to relativize other moral imperatives whilst constantly prioritizing the pursuit of organizational goals did not make them necessarily immoral , but it did facilitate a moral flexibility others denied themselves . 

  Nothing succeeded so much as success for the organization . 

  Putting these distinctive features together , Gross concluded that : 

  " the men at the top of organizations will tend to be ambitious , shrewd and possessed of a non-demanding moral code . 

  Their ambition will not be merely personal , for they will have discovered that their own goals are best pursued through assisting the organization to attain its goals . 

  While this is less true , or even untrue at the bottom of the organization , those at the top share directly in the benefits of organizational goal achievement , such as seeing their stock values go up , deferred compensation , and fringe benefits ... 

  Further , being at or near the top , these persons are those most strongly identified with the goals of the organization ... they believe in the , organization , they want to attain its goals , they profit personally from such goal attainment . 

  So they will try hard to help the organization attain those goals . 

  Finally , if the organization must engage in illegal activities to attain its goals , men with a non-demanding moral code will have the least compunctions about engaging in such behaviour . 

  Not only that , as men of power , pillars of the community , they are most likely to believe that they can get away with it without getting caught . 

  Besides , they are shrewd . " 

  ( Gross 1978 : 71 ) 

  Not only does the promotion system mean that people who rise to the top are likely to have just those personal characteristics it takes to commit corporate crime , but these are also reinforced by the psychological consequences of success itself , for these too free a person from the moral bind of conventional values . 

  That sociologists have been partially blind to this possible contributory cause of corporate crime springs ironically from the central position Merton's famous essay " Social Structure and Anomie " ( 1957 ) played in forming criminological consciousness . 

  In this , he explored the effect of anomie -- the disjuncture between cultural goals and the availability of legitimate means to achieve these goals -- as a possible source of crime . 

  He argued that since crime , as officially recorded , was greatest amongst the working class , it followed that anomie too must be greatest in that social stratum . 

  This analysis obscured Durkheim's original formulation ( 1898 ) in which anomie was conceptualized as normlessness , as a condition of moral deregulation . 

  This led him to focus on the top social stratum as the primary location of anomie , for it was power and not poverty that facilitated too easily the personal achievement of socially inculcated cultural ambitions . 

  Furthermore , once achieved , these targets no longer constrained individuals' aspirations or behaviour ; instead , successful individuals experienced a release from moral and social binds . 

  In a condition of pure individuation , the successful experience the sensation that anything and everything is possible . 

  Looking over the abyss of infinite possibility , they find it easy to slip into endless striving and pursuit of whatever is , at that moment , desired . 

  As Durkheim , comparing poverty and wealth , put it : 

  " Poverty protects against ... ( subjective deprivation ) because it is a restraint in itself . 

  No matter how one acts , desires have to depend upon resources to some extent ; actual possessions are partly the criterion of those aspired to . 

  So the less one has the less he is tempted to extend the range of his needs indefinitely . 

  Lack of power , compelling moderation , accustoms men to it ... 

  Wealth , on the other hand , by the power it bestows , deceives us into believing that we depend on ourselves only . 

  Reducing the resistance we encounter from objects , it suggests the possibility of unlimited success against them . 

  The less limited one feels , the more intolerable all limitation appears . " 

  ( Durkheim 1951 : 254 

  In Simon and Gagnon's further analysis of the " anomie of affluence " , they construct a typology of possible responses to the too easy achievement of cultural goals . 

  One major response , of particular relevance to understanding how executives can initiate and implement corporate crime , is called the " conforming deviant " . 

  They described this response as closely resembling Durkheim's original view on anomie and its consequences . 

  They write : 

  " Having acquired the means of gratification , such persons must explore the dimensions of pleasure in search of modes of gratification ; given the over determined character of their pursuit of the unreachable , their quest for new experiences begins to consume them . 

  Reinforcing this quest for the extraordinary , which by definition should bring them quickly to the margins of deviance , is the fact ... that one of the frequent rewards of achievement is an immunity to many of the sanctions that constrain and punish the less successful . 

  Wealth insures a protective primary group as well as differentially protective social responses . " 

  ( Simon and Gagnon 1977 : 372 ) 

  It seems reasonable to infer from the above that numerous corporate executives , having already responded to the situational demands necessary for career mobility within an organization by displaying sufficient degrees of competitive ambition , shrewdness , and moral flexibility will experience a further development of these characteristics when they have to respond to the relatively unaccountable and unconstrained power of being at or near the top of a large national , but especially transnational corporation . 

  They are then in a high state of preparedness to commit corporate crime should they perceive it as being necessary " for the good of the company " . 

  There is no intention in these arguments to give any sustenance to the view that corporate officials have been so successfully socialized into the " way of life " that they can not see what they are doing or that the organizational constraints upon them were so tight as to be " coercive " and therefore excusing . 

  A number of American studies , including Denzin ( 1977 ) on the liquor industry , Farberman ( 1975 ) and Leonard and Weber ( 1970 ) on car manufacturers and retailers , Geis ( 1967 ) on the heavy electrical equipment industry , and Blundell ( 1978 ) on an insurance company have all reported evidence supporting the view that higher officials create conditions under which their subordinates find it hard to refuse co-operation in illegal activities . 

  There exists according to these studies a " metaphysical pathos of " Godfatherism "' ( Needleman and Needleman 1979 : 518 ) . 

  According to this view top corporate officials make their organizational inferiors " offers they cannot refuse " . 

  It would be an easily acceptable explanation , if only it were entirely true . 

  But the fact is , the data in these studies can not be turned into generalizations , for they relate only to industries with high levels of vertical integration and economic concentration , involving an oligopolistic control over product supply frequently accompanied by a franchise relationship between manufacturer and seller . 

  Consequently , there is no evidence that this " Godfatherism " , or as Needleman and Needleman ( 1979 : 518 ) prefer to call it , " crime-coercive system " exists in other industries operating under other forms of competition . 

  Furthermore , even within the narrow spectrum of industries covered by the above studies there was considerable evidence ( Farberman 1975 : 447 ) of persons being prepared to refuse the offer and accept the consequences , which were not always as severe as the Godfather analogy suggests . 

  Thus rather than adopting the language of coercion and hence drawing parallels between corporate officials and , say , soldiers at the front in World War I compelled to go over the top at dawn to meet the German machine-gun bullets or be shot as " deserters " , it might be more realistic to argue that corporate officials are frequently placed in a position where they are required to choose between impairing their career chances or being a loyal organizational person . 

  That the latter seems to be chosen overwhelmingly testifies not to the existence of coercion , but to careful selection procedures for placing persons in corporate positions coupled with successful methods of persuading them that their interests and the corporation's interests happily coincide -- or at least , that that is the most sensible , pragmatic way of looking at it . 

  As the corporate lawyer put it , when asked why he went along with producing completely bogus insurance policies as part of the Equity Funding Scandal : " I did not think anything of it ; it was something the company needed done , that's all " ( Blundell 1978:171 ) . 

  Or as a laboratory supervisor , who was asked to go along with the manufacture of " doctored " data so as to secure a contract deadline put it ( Vandivier 1972:22 ) : 

  " I've been an engineer for a long time , and I've always believed that ethics and integrity were every bit as important as theorems and formulas , and never once has anything happened to change my beliefs . 

  Now this ... 

  Hell , I've got two sons I've got to put through school and I just ... " 

  Another co-conspirator , reflecting on a similar dilemma , said ( Vandivier 1973 : 24 ) : 

  " At 42 , with seven children , I had decided that the Goodrich Company would probably be my " home " for the rest of my working life . 

  The job paid well , it was pleasant and challenging , and the future looked reasonably bright . 

  My wife and I had bought a home and we were ready to settle down into a comfortable middle-aged , middle-class rut . 

  If I refused to take part in the ... fraud , I would have to either resign or be fired . " 

  A former sales manager looking back on the time he had to juggle with the moral and immoral balls of corporate demands said that : 

  " One faces a decision , I guess at such times , about how far to go with company instructions , and since the spirit of such meetings only appeared to be correcting a horrible price level situation , that there was not an attempt to actually damage customers , charge excessive prices , there was no personal gain in it for me , the company did not seem actually to be defrauding , corporate statements can evidence the fact that there have been poor profits during all these years ... 

  So I guess morally it did not seem quite so bad as might be inferred by the definition of the activity itself . " 

  ( Geis , in Geis and Meier 1977:123 ) 

  Finally , Judge J. Cullen Cancy , prior to imposing a sentence on the Heavy Electric Industry conspirators , caught nicely their contradiction : 

  " They were torn between conscience and an approved corporate policy , with the rewarding objective of promotion , comfortable security , and large salaries . 

  They were the organization , or company man ; the conformist who goes along with his superiors and finds balm for his conscience in additional comforts and security of his place in the corporate set-up . " 

  ( Geis , in Geis and Meier 1977 : 125 ) 

  Executives who commit corporate crime are not coerced into it , they do not necessarily have to go along with the advice or instructions of superiors . 

  They are men who rationally weigh up the advantage of conformity to criminal demands or staying on the path of righteousness ; for the most part they choose the former simply because it does not weigh on their conscience and because it seems more likely to secure economic and career advancement within the corporation . 

  Their basic motive is no mystery , " they want nothing more than we all want -- money , power , consideration -- in a word success ; but they are in a hurry and are not particular as to their means " ( Ross 1907 : 46 ) . 

  FROM CORPORATE MOTIVES AND WILLING PERSONNEL TO CORPORATE CRIME : WHAT STANDS IN THE WAY ? 

  " The most blameworthy acts are so often absolved by success that the boundary between what is permitted and what is prohibited , what is just and what is unjust , has nothing fixed about it , but seems susceptible to almost arbitrary change by individuals . " 

  ( mile Durkheim ) 

  So far , the explanation of corporate crime has concentrated on the specific long-term goal-orientated feature of corporations and the personnel who might become suited knights ambitiously pursuing the Holy Grail of profits , and who would , if necessary , be willing to initiate and execute crimes for the good of the corporation . 

  Given the power of large , particularly transnational corporations whose capital resources often outstrip the Gross National Product of some industrialized countries , there is every likelihood of success , both in business and in crime . 

  None the less there is a need to consider three countervailing social control forces , which appear to have some effect on persons contemplating " conventional " crimes , to see if they act as brakes on persons contemplating corporate crime . 

  These are : ( i ) does the criminal justice system or other state and societal forms of regulation deter corporate crime ? ( ii ) are there sufficient moral or cultural impediments in the way of corporate crime ? and ( iii ) are the structural opportunities for corporate crime sufficiently limited ? 

  DETERRENCE 

  " The thief who is in prison is not necessarily more dishonest than his fellows at large , but mostly one who , through ignorance or stupidity steals in a way that is not customary . 

  He snatches a loaf from the baker's counter and is promptly run into gaol . 

  Another man snatches bread from the table of hundreds of widows and orphans and similar credulous souls who do not know the ways of company promoters ; and , as likely as not , he is run into Parliament . " 

  ( George Bernard Shaw ) 

  Given the environmental problems facing corporations and the preparedness of executives and officials unhindered by moral or ethical constraints to find " rational " solutions , an operative criterion frequently forces itself into their consciousness -- " will it pay " ( and in whispered voices ) " even though it is technically illegal ? " 

  Since power has the capacity to sanctify crimes , almost in strict proportion to their enormity , corporate officials frequently discover themselves in the enviable situation of being able to conclude that " it will " . 

  To understand how this is possible , we need to consider how laws against corporate activities are enforced and the social meaning of sanctions imposed by typical violators . 

  In particular it is revealing to consider two principles in deterrence theory which are considered to inhibit " conventional " crime -- these are " the certainty of being caught " and " the severity of the punishment " . 

  For the irony is , in a society like ours apparently dedicated to " law and order " and having a penal policy based largely on deterrent principles , it appears that corporate crime somehow gets left out of the arena of legal and social control . 

  The certainty of ( not ) being caught 

  For the most part corporate crimes are not/ do not fall under the jurisdiction of the police , but under special regulatory bodies . 

  In America , there are the Occupational Safety and Health Administration , the Food and Drug Administration , Fair Employment Practices Commission , Securities and Exchange Commission , the Environmental Protection Agency . 

  In the UK , there are numerous inspectorates , commissions , and government departments , including inspectorates of factories , mines and quarries , explosives , railway , agriculture , alkali and clean air , and Scottish industrial , and commissions , such as monopolies and mergers , and such departments as energy , and trade and industry . 

  There are four important points to make about these special agencies . 

  ( i ) 

  Although they all have powers either to initiate or recommend criminal prosecution , they are primarily designed to be regulatory bodies whose main weapon against corporate misbehaviour is administrative , i. e. ( occasional ) inspection coupled with ( polite ) correspondence . 

  ( ii ) 

  The resources they command make them no match for national and transnational corporations . 

  This was made very clear by Her Majesty's Factory Inspectorate , which in the Manufacturing and Service Industry Report 1978 , wrote : 

  " The Factory Inspectorate ... works against a background of increasing commitments and slender resources . 

  There is a limit to what a force of some 900 inspectors in the field ( 700 general inspectors and 200 specialists ) can do in practice . 

  The Inspectorate is responsible for some 18,000,000 people at work scattered through some 500,000 or 600,000 different workplaces ... 

  It is obvious that an Inspectorate of its present size in relation to its responsibility can not hope to achieve either all it would like or all the public would like it to do . " 

  ( Health and Safety Executive 1980 : vi-vii ) 

  When these scarce resources are compared with those devoted to " conventional " crime it is quite staggering . 

  There are at present in Britain something like 120,000 police and although some of these are in the Fraud Squad , they represent an exceedingly small per cent of the force , and in any case , the majority of their work consists of monitoring and prosecuting white collar rather than corporate criminals . 

  The British government in 1980 felt that the problem of social security fraud was large enough to justify introducing 1,000 new inspectors ; yet it is hard to see how this problem exceeds that of the health , safety , and welfare of the workforce for whom there are only 900 inspectors . 

  What it does reflect is the willingness of the British government to increase the chances of criminalizing poor , oppressed , and sometimes inadequate individuals whilst leaving the rich corporate executive free to operate within and outside the law . 

  ( iii ) 

  The resources these agencies have available to pursue corporate crime through the courts are inadequate in comparison with those available to large national and transnational corporations . 

  Braithwaite ( 1979b : 130 ) believes that , " government lawyers , who must in many ways be all-rounders , can not compete with the corporation lawyer who spends his whole life finding out all there is to know about a narrowly delimited area of " legal loop-holes "' . 

  This belief is firmly backed up by the experience of the West German government when in 1965 it attempted to bring criminal charges against nine Chemie Grunenthal executives who were indicted for causing bodily harm and involuntary manslaughter in connection with the drug thalidomide . 

  Corporate lawyers managed to delay the case coming to court for two years and then they prolonged the proceedings for a further two years . 

  When Grunenthal finally decided to make civil compensation to the satisfaction of suffering parents and children , the federal government's prosecution lost the bit between its teeth and permitted the hearing to be suspended indefinitely . 

  So none of the executives was ever convicted . 

  Another example comes from Britain . 

  The Bingham Report ( 1978 ) on oil sanctions-busting during the decade following Southern Rhodesia's unilateral declaration of independence contained a twelve-page ( unpublished to the public ) appendix , entitled Evidence of Criminal Offences . 

  This listed the names of oil company directors who may have committed offences . 

  It also contained the view that an oil company in Mozambique might be vulnerable to prosecution -- this company , despite its name , is London-registered , with British directors , and was directly covered by sanctions legislation . 

  However , despite this evidence , prosecution would have been political suicide since the defendants might have argued that civil servants and certain government ministers knew of the oil sanctions-busting arrangements and therefore the company considered their actions , although technically illegal , were informally condoned by governmental officials . 

  That the Director of Public Prosecutions did not press for prosecution suggests that this line of defence might have been effective , or might have resulted in the prosecution net catching even larger , embarrassed fish . 

  The police were also involved in capturing the oil-sanctions busters but Martin Bailey ( 1978 ) , writing in The Times , reported that " Scotland Yard's investigation into ( this ) major case of corporate law-breaking was surprisingly modest . 

  James Smith , a chief superintendent , had the assistance of only one other detective " . 

  ( iv ) 

  These regulatory agencies are increasingly faced with transnational adversaries who are capable of shifting their main base of operation -- or if that is too drastic , their illegal activities at least -- to other countries where laws against such behaviour do not exist , or if they do , where enforcement is even more lax . 

  The exportation of corporate crime is certainly big business ( Braithwaite 1981a ; Chetley 1979 ; Muller 1974 ) not only for the corporations concerned but also for local political and governmental leaders . 

  This simple manoeuvre puts these corporations beyond the regulatory influence of agencies whose powers are purely national . 

  Furthermore , one country's legal system often constitutes an impediment to another country's attempts to gather information necessary to pursue a domestic case against a transnational corporation . 

  Thus Switzerland's Privacy Laws provide a naturally safe haven for transnational corporations who want to keep their financial dealings closed ( Klass 1975 ) . 

  Establishing guilt in a corruption case , for example , particularly before the US Corrupt Practices Act , 1977 , would be extremely difficult if not impossible . 

  As Jacoby , Nehemlis , and Ells convincingly argue : 

  " In order to obtain judicially admissible evidence , US investigators would have to obtain proof that ( i ) a payment was intended for a foreign official , ( ii ) it was made with a corrupt intent , and ( iii ) it was made for a prohibited purpose . 

  Collecting such evidence would necessitate the co-operation of foreign governments . 

  Whether ( they ) would allow US investigators to implicate one of their own nationals under US law is doubtful ... 

  Moreover , a US citizen accused of foreign bribery would be denied due process of law under the US constitution unless he could produce foreign witnesses and documents in his own defence . 

  These essential components of a fair defence would not be available to a defendant , as they are beyond the compulsory judicial process of US federal courts . " 

  ( Jacoby , Nehemlis , and Ells 1977 : 218 ) 

  Corporate executives contemplating the possibility of being required to commit corporate crimes know that they face a regulatory agency which for the most part will be unable to detect what is going on , and in the minority of cases when it does , it will have no heart and few resources to pursue the matter into the criminal courts . 

  This enforcement structure does little to deter corporate crime . 

  The ( lack of ) severe punishment 

  Deterrence theorists ( Zimring and Hawkins 1973 : 174 ) point out that formal sanctions , particularly if they are not severe , will only deter if there are negative social sanctions to reinforce them . 

  Assuming this to reflect common-sense rationality , it follows that there are three types of sanctions which prey on the minds of thoughtful officials contemplating the commission of corporate crime : ( i ) legal sanctions , and especially " will I be sent to prison ? " ; ( ii ) occupational sanctions and especially " will my job be lost or my promotional chances endangered ? " ; ( iii ) social sanctions -- " will I be rejected by family , friends , and acquaintances and required to resign from the country club ? " 

  For the most part , the evidence from corporate officials who have been sanctioned is that for this type of crime , criminalization and stigmatization are not fearful consequences likely to occur . 

  The corporate calculator has little to fear ; and he is correct in not being deterred for the costs incurred by corporate crime are indeed small . 

  Studies on the enforcement of laws prohibiting certain corporate activities in America ( McCormick 1977 ; Seymour 1973 ) , Canada ( Goff and Reasons 1978 ; Snider 1978 ) , and England ( Carson 1970 ) all suggest that even in that minority of cases where criminalization occurs , the legal sanctions imposed fail to act as a deterrent because they are trifling fines rather than imprisonment and normally are directed at smaller , relatively less victimizing , corporations . 

  McCormick ( 1977 ) analysed the nature of anti-trust enforcement in the US from 1890 through to 1969 . 

  This eighty-year period reveals very clearly how laws against corporations are ( not ) enforced and consequently how executives are ( not ) deterred . 

  The US authorities instigated 1,551 cases , but of these only 45 per cent were prosecuted as criminal ; the majority were dealt with as civil matters even though little difference could be found in the types of anti-trust behaviour these corporations committed . 

  Of those prosecuted criminally , about 80 per cent were convicted , the majority of these entering pleas of nolo contendere , which means they refused to defend themselves . 

  This in effect constitutes a plea bargain because the court is tacitly prepared to impose a modest sentence in return for its time , energy , and resources not being devoted to the expensive business of proving corporate guilt . 

  In fact , not one business person was imprisoned for violation of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act 1890 until the 1961 Heavy Electrical Conspiracy trial -- other persons had been imprisoned under this act but they were trade union officials ! 

  Furthermore , of the twenty-eight executives found guilty in 1961 , only seven were sent to prison , and then the maximum length of sentence was thirty days which was , of course , substantially reduced by remission . 

  Since then , imprisoning corporate officials has become less novel but by no means universal . 

  During the fourteen years following the Electrical conspiracy verdict , a further thirty-eight corporate executives out of nearly 800 convicted have been imprisoned for violations of the anti-trust laws . 

  The next most famous conspiracy , the Folding-Carton case in 1976 , resulted in 36 per cent of those convicted being jailed -- the heaviest sentence being fifteen days ( Clinard and Yeager 1980 : 281 ) . 

  Such sentences are hardly likely to deter other executives , particularly when evidence ( to be considered below ) shows that few people think any the worse of them . 

  The most frequent legal sanction imposed against corporations and their executives are fines . 

  These can be in the form of a regulatory agency fine , which is comparable to a fixed-fine imposed on traffic offenders , and a criminal fine imposed by the court . 

  The former are trifling and would be too insignificant to have any impact on corporate crime ( Clinard et al . 

  1979 : 143 ) . 

  The latter can be , and have been absolutely large . 

  Thus in the Electrical conspiracy , General Electric was fined $437,000 . 

  But when this and fines imposed on others as well as those firms involved in the Folding-Carton industry conspiracy are calculated against the gross revenues and then standardized as a fine imposed on a person earning $15,000 annually , it is clear that they are relatively minuscule . 

  Ermann and Lundman ( 1982:148 ) show that the heaviest fine in 1961 was the equivalent of $12.30 and in 1976 it was $1.80 ! 

  Just as a theatregoer is prepared to add the possible cost of illegal parking to the costs of his/ her evening's entertainment , or a city businessperson is prepared to add to the costs of a tax- deductible lunch , so a corporation regards fines as " reasonable licence fees " ( Dershowitz 1961 : 285 ) for engaging in illegal conduct . 

  Aptly summing up this situation , Green ( 1972 : 96 ) said that " while some court imposed fines achieve compensation and others create deterrence , anti-trust fines have the distinction of doing neither " . 

  Carson ( 1970 ) analysed the Factory Inspectorate files on a randomly selected sample of two hundred firms in one district of south-east England covering the years 1961 to 1966 . 

  During this period , the inspectorate recorded over 3,800 offences and every firm had at least one violation recorded against it . 

  The vast bulk of these acts involved insecure or improperly adjusted fencing of dangerous machinery , inadequate precautions against fire and explosion , as well as failure to inspect equipment and maintain healthy work conditions . 

  These offences can not be regarded as trivial because sometimes they result in an employee's or innocent bystander's death , serious injury , or permanently impaired health . 

  Yet despite the potential and actual harmful consequences of the failure to comply with factory regulations , the pattern of enforcement does not deter . 

  The inspectorate had six major methods of responding to a prima facie case of violation . 

  These were : no formal action , notification of matters requiring attention , indirect threat of prosecution , direct threat of prosecution , and prosecution . 

  Only 1.5 per cent of the actual enforcement decisions constituted prosecution , and of these cases all pleaded guilty and were fined on average only 50 . 

  The major response of the inspectorate was to write a letter stating what was wrong , and how and when it might be improved . 

  Imagine the outcry if the police were to send this type of letter to an adolescent they had reason to believe had violated the law : 

  Dear G. E. Rald , We should like to take this opportunity to inform you that on 12th March this year you were seen entering empty handed into the private premises of Ms P. C. Edwards of Convent St. , Folkestone and leaving shortly afterwards with your hands full . 

  In our opinion , this constitutes a violation of the Theft Act 1968 subsection 32 ( c ) and we would be grateful if you would consider the following advice : please stop going down Convent St. and entering houses without the owners' permission . 

  We should warn you that next March 12th another police constable will be on foot duty in Convent St. , and should he notice a repetition of your behaviour , we shall have to consider the possibility of taking even more stringent action than we have on this occasion . 

  Not only is this mild rebuke the typical response made by the inspectorate , but it is even the usual response to firms detected three or more times ; for these , the rate of prosecution was still only 3. 5 per cent ! 

  Naturally this enforcement pattern could be justified by the inspectorate who see their primary function not as a kind of industrial police force , but more of a pastoral mission rounding up wayward factory owners and showing them the light and contentment to be gained from compliance with current standards of safety , health , and welfare required by law . 

  However , this pastoral mission is not only up against hardened heathens , but it also considers that some ought not even to be read the lesson . 

  For the inspectorate tended to initiate a prosecution only against firms who had " unsatisfactory attitudes " ; others whose violations were seen to stem from adverse economic circumstances , or from some other extenuating condition were not prosecuted . 

  In other words , many executives in firms experiencing economic difficulties and who know from experience that the inspectorate mainly imposes administrative sanctions will calculate that their best interests lie in not conforming to factory health , safety , and welfare regulations ; instead they will gather their excuses and get on with the violations . 

  These above studies and many others all support the view that there is no general deterrent in the typical sanctions imposed on corporations and their offending executives . 

  Polite advisory letters , relatively minuscule fines , and short prison sentences leave corporations licenced to continue and leave us , as Dylan advised , with heads buried deep in our rags . 

  But there is one final possible regulatory factor -- civil damages . 

  Surely corporations will not deviate easily when they realize just how high civil damages can be ? 

  The evidence here too is not particularly encouraging for those who consider corporations are regulated by deterrence . 

  In the 1976 Folding-Carton conspiracy , International Paper had to pay $27 millions in class-action treble damage settlements . 

  But against their gross revenues and then standardized for a person earning $15,000 per annum this represented only $96 . 

  On the same calculation the highest settlement came to $675 paid by Federal Paper . 

  Such civil action settlements , whilst absolutely large are again relatively insignificant . 

  Indeed , in the trial of Ford Motor Company in Indiana , 1978 , it became evident according to Swigert and Farrell , that : 

  " the manufacturer had known that the fuel tank on its subcompact Pinto was defectively designed and had consciously decided to proceed with production in spite of the potential hazards . 

  The decision , the grand jury found , was predicted on a cost-benefit analysis . 

  Officials at Ford allegedly predicted the number of severe burn injuries and deaths that would result from the defect , and estimated that the cost of repairing the car would exceed anticipated court settlements . " 

  ( Swigert and Farrell 1981:166 ) 

  Even if the typical criminal sanction holds out little hope as a general deterrent , does it act as a specific deterrent ? 

  Are those who have to pay fines deterred in future ? 

  It is difficult to see why they would be deterred any more than fined traffic-offenders are deterred ; they can calculate rationally the cost of future fines and build that into any contemplation of irregular and illegal behaviour . 

  However , there is a study which tends to go against this common sense reasoning . 

  In an attempt to consider the specific deterrent function of sanctions imposed under consumer protection legislation in Australia , Hopkins ( 1980a ) asks : " do sanctions applied to corporate offenders prevent or reduce the likelihood of recidivism ? " 

  Reminding us that Sutherland's answer was definitely not , Hopkins points out with insight that this negative answer was only possible because Sutherland conflated individual and corporate crime , thus reducing large rambling enterprises with thousands of employees to a single entity . 

  If any one of these employees committed a corporate crime , then this was added to any previous crime committed by any other employee , no matter how distantly related to the organizational site of previous offences . 

  This , said Sutherland , constituted recidivism . 

  Clearly this was an unsatisfactory procedure severely reducing the acceptability of his answer . 

  Hopkins argued that much of this type of corporate crime ( violation of consumer laws ) could be viewed as a breakdown in communication or organizational procedures , and he attempted to see if , as a result of being fined , these companies made any effort to locate the flawed chain of information and correct it . 

  In other words , did they , as a result of being fined , take steps to prevent the reoccurrence of this behaviour ? 

  His conclusions were : 

  " Of the 15 companies in which offences were attributable to organizational defects , nine made significant changes designed to reduce the likelihood of recidivism . 

  Two made minor changes which , while forestalling the possibility of an exact repetition of the offence in question , failed to rectify the general weakness which the offence had uncovered . 

  Two companies made no changes at all , and for two , no information was available . 

  Where organizational defects were involved therefore , the prosecution can be said to have led to significant organizational improvements in at least 60 per cent of cases . " 

  ( Hopkins 1980a : 210 ) 

  From the available evidence , it seems fair to conclude that the typical legal sanction against corporate crime does not act as a general deterrent -- others are not put off merely because some corporations and their executives have been fined , particularly when the fines are comparatively small and tax-deductable -- and the evidence , such as it is , suggests that a specific deterrent function may operate , but only to deter corporations from recommitting the same offence . 

  The one study on which this latter conclusion is based can not be generalized to demonstrate that there is a specific deterrent effect for all other corporate offences , and in any case , it should be treated very cautiously , not only because a single study can often be shown later to have missed the general condition , but also because it flies in the face of empirically grounded deterrence theory . 

  Thus as Andeneas argues : 

  " A trusted cashier committing embezzlement , a minister who evades payment of his taxes , a teacher making sexual advances towards minors and a civil servant who accepts bribes have a fear of detection which is more closely linked with the dread of public scandal and subsequent social ruin than with apprehensions of legal punishment . " 

  ( Andeneas 1966 : 964 ) 

  There are no sharp judicial teeth or public claws to arouse a fear of detection in corporate executives . 

  An occasional court appearance can become enshrined as mere ritual ceremony totally encapsulating a particular moment of time which can be easily forgotten . 

  The evidence is , in the case of corporate crime , that nothing much happens by way of public scandal and social ruin . 

  The majority of executives found guilty of corporate crime not only retain their jobs or have others found for them , but also find that funds to cover their fines are somehow made available . 

  For some , the crime may even pay : thus in the Goodrich disc-brake scandal of the late 1960s , when the company attempted to foist a defective brake-disc system on to a customer who happened to be too clever to be deceived , two of the main executives involved were later promoted ( Vandivier 1972 : 33 ) . 

  Many companies in the Heavy Electrical Equipment conspiracy did not dismiss " guilty executives " ( for they had merely been doing their job ) but even those who did , did not do so with the intention of ruining them . 

  Indeed , all the dismissed executives were soon re-employed , sometimes in positions with higher salaries than their previous position ! 

  This is of course , in marked contrast to the typical experience of persons found guilty of " conventional " crimes ( Martin and Webster 1971 ) . 

  Not only are there few adverse occupational consequences , but there is very little social scandal . 

  Those few cases which are prosecuted fail to arouse media-indignation , except when it expresses disapproval for the way executives are very occasionally over-sanctioned ! 

  And amongst neighbours , an executive found guilty of corporate crime continues to be regarded as " upright and steadfast ; indeed , they will probably see him as solid and substantial a citizen as they themselves are " ( Geis 1978 : 283 ) . 

  In any case , amongst such a community there is a strong ethic directed towards making money but a great disapproval of it being stolen directly , as in the case of larceny , burglary , or robbery . 

  Thus , since the executive's way of making money for the corporation is not viewed as either immoral or criminal , his neighbours are hardly likely to discriminate against him ; after all , there but for the grace of the enforcement agencies 

  Because corporate crimes are hardly likely to be described as heinous in the media , few consciences are outraged and scandalized ; consequently , the ingredients which deterrent theorists argue are necessary to achieve a specific deterrent effect do not typically exist . 

  In these circumstances , executives feel free to commit corporate crimes . 

  It also means that other executives calculating the odds will most likely decide that their jobs , their friendship network , and their club affiliations will not be put at risk . 

  As any good control theorist ( Box 1981a ; Hirschi 1969 ; Johnson 1979 ) knows , even if people have a high stake in conformity , this will not act as a brake on their criminal behaviour if they perceive -- quite rightly in the case of executives contemplating corporate crime -- that this stake will not be put at risk by undertaking such a shady but profitable enterprise . 

  IDEOLOGICAL SUPPORTS : STRUCTURAL IMMORALITIES , NEUTRALIZATIONS , AND CORPORATE SELF-IMAGE 

  " Criminaloids move in an atmosphere of friendly approval ... and this can still smart any conscience with the balm of good fellowship and adulation . " 

  ( Edward Ross , Sin and Society ) 

  Corporate officials are able to transform motives which make corporate crime possible into actual behaviour because they operate in a subculture of " structural immoralities " ( Mills 1956 : 138 ) . 

  This is conceptually similar but not identical to the phenomena described by Matza ( 1964 : 33-68 ) as the subculture of delinquency : both consist of " precepts and customs that are delicately balanced between convention and crime " ; both " posit objectives that may be attained through ( crime ) but also other means " ; both " allow ( crime ) but it is not demanded or necessarily considered the preferred path " ; and both consist of " norms and sentiments " which are " beliefs that function as the extenuating conditions under which ( crime ) is permissible " . 

  Thus , these subcultures respectively enable corporate officials and lower-class adolescent males to commit crimes without too many pangs of conscience ; through their sanitizing prism , each sub-culture softens criminal acts so that they assume the appearance of " not really " being against the law , or it transforms them into acts required by a morality higher than that enshrined in a parochial criminal law . 

  There are however , two main major crucial differences between these subcultures . 

  Whereas lower-class juvenile delinquents find themselves confronting a legal system which has literally declared war against them , upper-class corporate officials find a legal system which is either at , or on their side ; for the most part it is unwilling and if not , unable even to guarantee compensation for the victims of corporate crime let alone to contain and control the crime itself . 

  Second , corporate officials are comparatively more committed to conventional values and a respectable self-identity than typical lower-class male adolescents . 

  Consequently , they have an even greater need to neutralize the moral bind of the law and thus protect their respectability and self-identity from the signs of discreditability implicit in corporate crimes . 

  It is not difficult for corporate officials to cover themselves in " purity " even when they are breaking the law because the " structural immorality " of their corporate environment provides a library of verbal technique for neutralizing the moral bind of laws against corporate behaviour . 

  First , officials can deny responsibility . 

  They do this , not by pleading momentary insanity , as Matza ( 1964 : 69-100 ) says delinquents frequently do , but by pleading " ignorance " , " accident " , or " acting under orders " . 

  Laws attempting to regulate corporate activity tend to be excessively vague , consist of ambiguous definitions , and subject to subtle but significant shifts in meanings ; or at least , that is how they can be interpreted , particularly by those desiring to violate them . 

  As Merton ( 1957 : 141 ) sees some corporate misbehaviour , " it is not easy to say whether it is an instance of praiseworthy salesmanship or a penitentiary offence " . 

  In these circumstances , it is convenient for corporate officials to pull the cloak of honest ignorance over their heads and proceed under its darkness to stumble blindly and unwittingly over the thin line between what is condoned and what is condemned . 

  Claiming that whatever happened was an " accident " is another means of denying intent . 

  Of course , this is not entirely implausible . 

  None of the fatal accidents or occupational diseases mentioned earlier were the result of any corporate officials intending to kill or mutilate hundreds of employees , customers , or civilians . 

  Their primary motive was " for the good of the company " : that meant creating more efficiency in the productive process , cutting costs , not making unnecessary repairs , and so on , all with an eye on improving the corporate's profitable position . 

  They did not intend to harm anyone ; the consequences might be unfortunate , but accidental and irrelevant for establishing whether or not the act was criminal . 

  Thus by prioritizing intention and relegating consequences as accidents -- conveniently turning a blind eye to strict liability-corporate officials can proceed to commit corporate crimes because they do not perceive them as such in the first place . 

  A third means of avoiding responsibility consists of shifting the blame to even higher officials . 

  This may be achieved by engaging in what Matza ( 1969:93 ) refers to as " natural reduction " , that is , reducing oneself -- the subject -- into a thing-like object incapable of transcending circumstances , which in this particular mundane instance means viewing oneself as incapable of disobeying orders from high places . 

  Thus one conspirator in the 1961 Great Heavy Electrical Industry conspiracy said : " We understand this was what the company wanted us to do " , and another reported that , " It ( the instruction ) came to me from my superior ... but my impression was that it came to him from higher up " . 

  And a lawyer involved in the Equity Funding Scandal of the mid-1970s said : " It was like someone asking you to help move a sofa from here to there . 

  I did not think anything of it ; it was something the company needed done , that's all " ( Blundell 1978:171 ) . 

  A second technique of neutralization available to corporate officials is to deny the victim . 

  When the " victim " is , say , a government agency such as the Inland Revenue ( UK ) or Medicare ( US ) , or another vast transnational organization , or when it is millions of individuals deprived of trivial amounts of property , or when whole countries or even continents are " victimized " as in the case of bribery and corruption of Third World governments or legal officials , or the exportation of products whose consumption is only really safe in a western cultural environment ( Chetley 1979 ) , then it is possible for the corporate official to convince himself that there is no real person suffering , and therefore there is no real criminal victim . 

  This is plausible because in our common-sense construction crimes involve real people as victims ; many corporate crimes , because they fall on impersonal organizations or distant countries , fail to match this common-sense stereotype , and therefore can be viewed as non-criminal . 

  It is a very convenient stereotype ! 

  A third technique is for corporate officials to condemn the condemners ; they can deny the legitimacy of the law which regulates their behaviour as well as the competence of those attempting to enforce " unnecessary " law . 

  The law , they can argue to themselves , should have no business regulating the behaviour of corporations , particularly in a free-enterprise system ; the state , to quote a fashionable political phrase , " should get off our backs " . 

  " If " , argues Conklin ( 1977 : 94 ) , " businessmen feel ideologically deprived by government regulation because they think that the law is unfair and unduly restrictive of the economic forces to which they have a strong commitment , they may violate the law " . 

  The law can not only be condemned for being " unnecessary " but also because those who formulate and publicly defend it are " hypocrites " . 

  Clearly those firms who engaged in oil-sanctions busting on the South African continent after Southern Rhodesia had illegally declared , unilateral independence were able to " neutralize " their own and subsequent misbehaviour in this way . 

  They knew that the government which had passed the order prohibiting the supply of oil to Southern Rhodesia was sufficiently realistic to know it could not be enforced . 

  But what must the hypocritical collusion of government officials in this illegal activity have done to the way corporate officials regard laws against corporate behaviour more generally ? 

  Clearly , it could not have enhanced it ; why obey a legal system in which senior officials publicly pose as against one thing but privately collude in its occurrence -- not only ought they to be condemned as hypocrites but their laws ought also to be disregarded as mere propaganda concealing the lack of will to control corporate behaviour . 

  Fourth , corporate officials may be able to appeal to higher loyalty and by that technique deny the moral bind of the law . 

  This can take at least three forms . 

  Officials could accept responsibility for their behaviour but argue that in being willingly loyal to the corporation they were obeying a superior moral imperative . 

  They could also argue that in general there is frequently a difference between morality and legalism and that the former has a greater claim on their allegiance . 

  As one executive in the Great Electrical conspiracy stated : 

  " One faces a decision , I guess , at such times , about how far to go with company instructions , and since the spirit of such meetings only appeared to be correcting a horrible price level situation , that there was not an attempt to damage customers , charge excessive prices , there was no personal gain in it for me , the company did not seem actually to be defrauding ... morally it did not seem quite so bad as might be inferred by the definition of the activity itself . " 

  ( Geis , in Geis and Meier 1977:123 ) 

  And another said : 

  " Sure such collusion was illegal , but it was not unethical . 

  It was not any more unethical than if the companies had a summit conference the way Russia and the West meet . 

  Those competitors " meetings were just attended by a group of distressed individuals who wanted to know where they were going . " 

  ( Smith 1969 : 888 ) 

  Finally , officials can claim that business ethics are morally superior to mere formal legalism . 

  Thus free enterprise -- the pursuit of fair profit , the generator of wealth and employment , the backbone on which social welfare is possible -- can be viewed , at least by corporate officials , as the primary ethic for and of an industrial society , and conformity to this neutralizes any obedience to the law merely because it happens to be the law . 

  This can be felt particularly strongly by corporate officials if the law attempts to interfere with free enterprise . 

  Thus by referring to such values as " our country's values " , business men appeal to a higher loyalty than obedience to the law and thereby free themselves from its moral constraint . 

  By the use of these techniques of neutralization , which are themselves embedded in the " structural immorality " of corporations , executives are able to violate the law without feeling guilt or denting their respectable self-image . 

  Furthermore , this final piece of identity cosmetic can be enhanced by the official portrait of crime as being essentially a lower-class phenomenon . 

  Since murder , assault , and theft are committed by working-class men , corporate executives see their own virtue reflected in the guilt of those beneath them . 

  Thus corporate officials are both mystified as to their own crime , and misdirected as to the distribution of crime in general . 

  Both mystification and misdirection preserve the appearance of corporate respectability and help keep invisible , to themselves and others , the underlying ugly reality of corporate crime . 

  OPPORTUNITY 

  " You got criminals in high places , 

  And law-breakers making the rules . " 

  ( Bob Dylan ) 

  The third major structural feature facilitating corporate crime is opportunity . 

  There are at least three dimensions to this : the relationship between corporate and enforcement agencies ; the nature of laws against corporate activities ; and , probably the greatest of them all , the power of corporations to intervene in the process by which corporate behaviour becomes incorporated in criminal law . 

  Obviously the lenient system of law enforcement constitutes a kind of opportunity structure denied to those subjected to higher rates of prosecution and the imposition of severe sanctions . 

  But the fact that corporate activities are not subject to high levels of surveillance compared to , say , lower-class adolescents whenever the " Special Patrol Group " ( UK ) swoop down on ethnically mixed neighbourhoods , and that they are not confronted by regulatory agencies with sufficient resources to maintain an adequate level of surveillance through frequent inspection , also constitutes a greater opportunity structure conducive to corporate crime . 

  Corporate officials can further reduce the surveillance on them by simply shifting resources , records , money , and personnel between national boundaries thus rendering their behaviour virtually disentangleable even to the most persistent regulatory agency . 

  Finally , the sweet exchange of personnel from , agency to corporation ( and vice versa ) and the extent to which some agency officials are amenable to getting their hands grubby with filthy lucre again make the executive suite a relatively safe place for planning illegal behaviour -- there might even be some people present who are supposed to be enforcing the law ! 

  A second dimension to the corporate illegal opportunity structure consists of the nature of criminal law itself and the legal requirement of intent which still dominates corporate crimes . 

  Criminal laws aimed at regulating corporate activities tend to refer to a specific rather than a general class of behaviour . 

  For example , as tax avoidance schemes are dreamt up by corporate accountants and lawyers or financial entrepreneurs , so the law attempts to encapsulate them by making that specific tax avoidance scheme illegal . 

  But of course , given the superior cunning of these corporate gentlemen , they are always able to discover another scheme , and still another scheme , and so on . 

  Until a tax avoidance clause is incorporated into law which would require corporate officials to establish the legality of any avoidance scheme , there will always be a wide-open prairie of opportunity for gouging back profits from the exchequer , leaving ordinary tax-payers to " foot the bill " . 

  Criminal laws against corporate behaviour again facilitate crime because they focus purely on the regulation broken and not on the consequences of that broken regulation . 

  Thus the company responsible for the hoist accident at Littlebrook Dee power station were not prosecuted for the fact that five men died , but for the fact that the machinery was not properly maintained or inspected . 

  For this , they were fined 5,000 . 

  In conventional crime there is no such similar fracture ; a person is charged with the consequences of his/ her action ; if someone dies as a consequence of being stabbed , the assailant is more likely to be charged with a homicide offence rather than " carrying an offensive weapon " . 

  The point of this fracture between regulation broken and its consequences is that it facilitates corporate crime ; executives need only concern themselves with the likelihood of being leniently punished for breaking regulations , whilst ignoring its consequences for the law does not concern itself with the consequences either . 

  Most laws against corporate criminal behaviour require that intention be proved before guilt can be established . 

  Not only is this virtually impossible ( and improbable ) in cases of injury -- fatal or otherwise -- to employees or the public , but in cases of financial irregularities it is always open for the suspect(s ) to plead that it was not his intention to defraud shareholders , indeed even though he engaged in what appears to be financially irregular practices , his intention all along had been to improve shareholders' financial interests , but unfortunately due to unforeseeable circumstances , matters went sour . 

  It was just this kind of argument that two company directors put forward when they were prosecuted in New South Wales in 1979 for apparently causing shareholders to lose more than A$22 millions ( Hopkins 1980b ) . 

  Although some of these opportunity structures -- provided ironically , by the legal system itself-could be blocked , it is unlikely that they would be . 

  Clearly , business interests would be against any general proscription and particularly against strict liability , since then it " would not be possible to know with any degree of certainty whether a proposed course of action was legal " ( Hopkins 1980b : 427 ) and that would deprive corporate executives of an essential precondition for entering or staying in the market , namely predictability . 

  Important as these two above opportunity structures are for facilitating corporate crime , the greatest opportunity lies in their ability to prevent their actions from becoming subject to criminal sanctions in the first place . 

  Their ability persistently to cause avoidable harm , injury , and suffering is because they prevent much of this becoming incorporated into laws against corporate behaviour . 

  Whether or not the avoidable harm , injury , and suffering should then be called " crime " is a point legal theorists then dance on for ever ; but a " crime " by any other name causes at least just as much pain and grief . 

  To understand why the criminal ( and administrative ) law is so narrow in its encroachment on corporate activity , we need to consider those moments in history when the state does create laws apparently against the interests of business and financial lites . 

  For these not only reveal something about the nature of criminal law and hence crime itself , but also how corporations are able to channel some of their resources into a concerted attempt to prevent their socially injurious behaviours from being criminalized . 

  Graham's ( 1972 ) analysis of the social processes leading to the US Comprehensive ( sic ) Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act , 1970 , considers how , through tough lobbying tactics and calling on good connections -- especially in the House of Representatives -- the pharmaceutical manufacturers were able to limit the discussion of amphetamine abuse so that it focused on that small minority of persons who inject it . 

  The vast bulk of users -- housewives , businessmen , students , physicians , truck drivers , and athletes -- many of whom obtain their pills through legitimate channels , represented a considerably profitable market provided it could be kept clear of federal control . 

  To this end , Hoffman-La Roche , who annually reaped profits during the late 1960s of about $40 million , was prepared to exert effective pressure on the legislature . 

  Senator Dodd , who had attempted to bring more amphetamine use under control , argued that Hoffman-La Roche " paid a Washington law firm three times the annual budget of the Senate subcommittee staff to assure that their drugs would remain uncontrolled " ( Graham 1972 : 22 ) . 

  And Senator Eagleton , who had successfully brought in a reclassification amendment so that amphetamine would be more tightly controlled , stated , when he saw the amendment subsequently overturned : " when the chips are down , the power of the drug companies was simply more compelling than any appeal to the public welfare " ( p. 53 ) . 

  The outcome is that an industry which has skilfully managed to convert a chemical with meagre medical justification and considerable potential for harm ( Grinspoon and Hedblom 1975 ) into a legitimate drug , remained free from federal control to go on manufacturing , distributing , and advertising it . 

  The industry's corporate leaders must have laughed demonically to themselves when they saw the full weight of the law coming down on people manufacturing and distributing comparatively harmless drugs , such as marijuana . 

  Legitimate drug rackets are after all not only lucrative -- there's gold in them there pills ( Klass 1975 ) -- but they also provide the occasion for seeing oneself -- if you are involved in them -- as sharper , shrewder , and more powerful than those ending up the wrong side of the law . 

  Shover ( 1980 ) examined the clash of interests in the run up to the US Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act , 1977 . 

  He revealed that although this appeared to be an instance favouring a pluralist conception of law-making , i. e. law representing a compromise between the interests of numerous groups , it was in fact a law which basically reflected the interests of the coal industry and those dependent upon it -- manufacturers of heavy equipment and the electric utilities , who consume nearly 80 per cent of domestically mined coal . 

  It appeared that when this alliance of powerful forces realized that some legalistic gloss over their environmental vandalism was necessary or desirable , not because they wanted it but because the public were increasingly becoming aware of pollution , they actively encouraged the legislature to formulate a bill which created the illusion of controlling corporations . 

  In fact it provided the industry with more control over its environment by making conflicts over environmental damage an administrative problem whose outcome could be predicted by corporate executives . 

  It thus gained for the coal industry what all organizations strive for , namely rational control of the environment through being better able to predict its fluctuations . 

  Similar processes , reflecting the ability of corporations to prevent their socially and economically injurious behaviour being criminalized operate also in Britain . 

  Thus Gunningham considered the clash of interests between " in the red corner " the National Smoke abatement Society , the Conservation Society of Britain , Friends of the Earth , and other groups for the non-pollution of the environment and in , the " blue corner " : 

  " capitalists with strong economic interests in maintaining the status quo . 

  These were involved because in a capitalist market economy , the organization of economic activity has historically been based on numerous fragmented units , each seeking to operate as profitably as possible , whilst paying only the costs which it is impossible to avoid . 

  Thus the dilemma of the polluting industry is that controlling pollution is expensive , but adds nothing to the value of the goods produced , and is bad business for any firm whose main concern is to maintain profitability in a competitive situation . " 

  ( Gunningham 1974 : 39 ) 

  The outcomes of these conflicting interests are enshrined in the Clean Air Acts of 1956 and 1968 and the Deposit of Poisonous Wastes Act 1972 . 

  Under these acts , the Alkali and Clean Air Inspectorate was responsible for ensuring that the emission of some pollution from industry was no more than " practicably reasonable " , a level so ambiguous and vague and capable of numerous interpretations by corporate lawyers that the actual amount of pollution was frequently allowed to rise above a level found tolerable by local residents . 

  Thus in 1971 , United Carbon Black Ltd of Swansea was forced to spend money on improving its air emissions because local residents had formed a strong pressure group . 

  Similarly , the Imperial Smelting Corporation ( a Rio Tinto Zinc subsidiary ) at Avonmouth was discovered by scientists working at Bristol University to be " poisoning " local agricultural land as well as inhabitants . 

  Again , after a period of closure , this company improved its pollution control . 

  The point is , in both these cases the Alkali Inspectorate had been satisfied that the pollution control by these corporations was " practicably reasonable " . 

  Furthermore , this should not be too surprising . 

  Under the acts , corporations are required to measure their own pollution level and report this to the inspectorate . 

  Clearly such a self-monitoring system is wide open to abuse , particularly amongst those who have a clear but maybe not clean motive for doing so . 

  Gunningham concluded that the acts only reflected the types of control which were economically convenient to industry , and that " since strict enforcement of more severe legislation would attack the very root of capitalism ... then any compromise between alternative policies and views is always struck within an area which does not threaten these interests " ( Gunningham 1974 : 83 ) . 

  A further example of how the interests of the powerful are enshrined in legislation which has the appearance of opposing them is provided by Carson's ( 1974,1980 ) analysis of the Factory Regulation Act , 1833 . 

  He suggests that although manufacturers had an instrumental influence in supporting this act -- it helped to rationalize and make predictable the conduct of competitors -- they also saw it as having a symbolic dimension , which if anything , was predominant in their minds . 

  Carson suggested that : 

  " The Act of 1833 publicly affirmed that the precepts of common humanity were not so alien to the logic of industrial capitalism that checks could only by imposed from without . 

  In this way it facilitated public representation of the relationship between the state , capital , and an emerging working class as one of pre-eminent moral stature . " 

  ( Carson 1974:137 ) 

  However , the achievement of this symbolic significance could be attained with minimum constraint upon factory owners' autonomy and an ineffectual enforcement . 

  Thus in the process of passing the 1833 Act , " a tide which might have run much more strongly in the direction of the " criminalization " of the offending employer was effectively stemmed' ( p.138 ) . 

  A final instance of the same process is given by McCormick ( 1979 ) , who analysed the social forces behind the American Sherman Antitrust Act , 1890 . 

  He argues that the act reflected the clash of interests between the dwindling power of agrarian groups and the rising power of manufacturing and big business groups . 

  The former power was not entirely diminished , and its lingering potential threat was at its greatest in the Populist movement of the 1880s . 

  To this threat , the political representatives of big business had to make a response . 

  It took the form of the apparently anti-monopoly anti-big-business Sherman Act . 

  In reality it was not like this at all . 

  The act was the least constraining of the various bills introduced into the legislature ; it was a weak remedial measure , quite impotent as a regulatory instrument , and its sole purpose was to serve as a token declaration of anti-monopolism . 

  As a consequence of its scope , its vague wording , and its proposed method of enforcement , which was mainly civil , it applied to very little business conduct and was , as discussed earlier , more suitable for the prosecution of labour and small businessmen than large manufacturers . 

  In comparison with " conventional " offenders , corporate executives find themselves in an enviable position . 

  Not only do they have a greater opportunity to commit their favoured types of crimes , but they have the capacity to influence which of their behaviours will be regarded as corporate crimes in the first place . 

  Figure 1 attempts to summarize the above arguments and I hope that this will serve to facilitate comprehension where it is needed . 

  Control , regulation , and justice 

  What can be done to reduce significantly the volume of killing , maiming , and economic deprivation caused by corporate crime ? 

  One brief terse answer is'**** all ! 

 ' According to a more polite version of this argument , these crimes are embedded and endemic within the capitalist system . 

  The prioritization of profit under conditions of environmental uncertainties inevitably leads to persistent and chronic levels of corporation crime . 

  No piecemeal liberal reform will make one iota of difference . 

  Only when the means of production and distribution are socialized will the incidence of corporate crime diminish . 

  This may , or may not be true ; and true or not , it might not be a bad thing if many leading corporations were socialized , just to see if our needs were better served . 

  But there is no hope of that occurring in the foreseeable future . 

  Short of the holocaust , when everything will be blown away on the wind of oblivion , there is no reason to believe that we will see the lights going down on capitalism in our lifetime . 

  Meanwhile , the mountain of victimized employees , consumers , taxpayers , shareholders , and the public continues to grow . 

  Would it really be justifiable to turn away from such carnage and pillage ? 

  Maybe liberal reformism is something to be contemplated today , even by those waiting patiently for the revolution tomorrow . 

  Figure 1 Understanding corporate crime 

  Although there are some grounds for not expecting too much from slight changes in the system , there are , none the less , other grounds for believing that something good can be achieved , at least in principle . 

  If hundreds of corporation-caused deaths can be prevented , if thousands of occupational diseases and injuries can be avoided , and if millions of pounds stolen by corporations can be saved , then these would be no bad achievements . 

  The question is , however , can these be realized in practice ? 

  The history of attempts to control and regulate corporate crimes does not give much cause for optimism , and indeed the idea of it reduces radicals to knowing laughter . 

  For it is quite clear that despite innovative legislation , the proliferation of enforcement agencies , the relatively new use of imprisonment for corporate offenders , and absolutely ( but not relatively ) large fines for offending corporations , there has not been a substantial brake on corporate crime . 

  In many ways , it has been a huge , cynical black-comedy -- although the victims are not laughing . 

  But there are some silver linings peering over the edges of this dark cloud of history . 

  First , in North America at least , there is a growing awareness of corporate crime , although not necessarily the extent of it . 

  Throughout the 1970s attitudes have shifted . 

  Undoubtedly the best illustration of this can be obtained by comparing the research of Rossi et al . 

  ( 1974 ) with that of Cullen , Golden , and Cullen ( 1982 ) . 

  The latter study , which was conducted in Macomb , Illinois , discovered that during the period 1972 ( when Rossi carried out his research in Baltimore ) to 1979 , " the seriousness rating of white-collar crime ... increased both absolutely and to a greater extent than any other category " , and more important , increases in seriousness ratings were pronounced in two categories of corporate crime , particularly " violence " ( resulting in death or injury ) and " price-fixing " . 

  The authors suggest that these changes may reflect the publicity surrounding the Ford Pinto car scandal , and the various price-fixing conspiracy trials including the Folding-Carton industry trial in 1976 . 

  This research is not isolated . 

  Further confirmation that public attitudes towards corporate crime are hardening and becoming more punitive have come from other American studies ( McCleary et al . 

  1981 ; Sinden 1980 ; Wolfgang 1980 ; Yoder 1979 ) . 

  The last author commented " increasing numbers of Americans have become aware that crime exists in the suites of many corporations just as surely as it exists in the streets of their cities and suburbs " . 

  Where this awareness of corporate crime has been expressed elector-ally , corporate victims have benefited . 

  Thus in 1970 a new prosecuting attorney was elected in King County , Washington ( Seattle and environs ) , partly on a platform of increasing consumer fraud and general white-collar prosecution . 

  Stotland and associates analysed the effects of subsequent increases in prosecution and enforcement and concluded that " a tendency toward an upward rise of home repair fraud was reduced by convictions ... however , the increased sanctions did not appear to have completely reversed the upward movement of home repair fraud " ( 1980 : 262 ) . 

  Clearly a major problem in controlling corporate crime is raising victim and public consciousness to a level where the community desires and supports a policy of more active and effective state control and regulation . 

  This could be ( and has been ) achieved not only by investigative journalism and television documentaries , which do appear to have influenced the general level of awareness amongst American citizens to such an extent that Spiro Agnew referred to it as the " post-Watergate " morality . 

  However , more still is needed . 

  Raising victim consciousness could also be achieved by incorporating it as a function explicitly pursued by controlling and regulating agencies . 

  Intense and widespread publicization of corporate crime could produce a greater public sensitivity and this in turn , could become the catalyst out of which stronger and tougher enforcement programmes blossom . 

  The second hopeful sign is that the state and its criminal justice system ( broadly conceived to include criminal , administrative , and civil law ) has shown itself receptive to arguments that corporate crime victims deserve protection and that corporate criminals deserve sanctioning , particularly when those arguments have been well orchestrated , empirically supported , and contain implicit electoral threats . 

  The criminal justice system projects itself above social conflicts and expects to be recognized as fair and just because it is guided by universal principles that transcend sectional interests . 

  But there are contradictions between these principles and judicial practice , and these can be exploited advantageously for corporate victims . 

  A forceful demonstration that the law is failing to realize its own professed principles may have the beneficial effect of shaming it into action . 

  For example , it claims allegiance to equality before the law , yet it systematically flouts this by treating corporate offenders and offending corporations leniently . 

  It also claims our allegiance because it offers to protect our lives , limbs , and property , although it does little to protect us from predatory corporations . 

  Pushing the state and its legal institutions to act consistently with their own principles at least brings out the contradictions between what they say they are doing and what they are actually doing . 

  Publicizing this may undermine their legitimacy , an outcome they would want to avoid . 

  In response , they may close the gap , if only slightly , between principles and practices . 

  The final glimmer comes from recent attempts to develop novel strategies for controlling corporate crime . 

  These turn out to be old ideas -- worn-out and discredited as solutions to conventional criminals -- reinvigorated by appearing in new bottles . 

  If employees , consumers , and other corporate victims had their awareness sharpened and supported by trade unionism , consumerism , and environmentalism , and if the state and legal institutions could be shamed into closing the gap between lofty principles and tawdry practices , then some of these old ideas could be put into effective operation . 

  ENTERPRISING IDEAS FOR SANCTIONING DEVIANT ENTERPRISES 

  There seems to be agreement that corporate criminals can be deterred because their crimes are essentially instrumental , being outcomes of a fine balance between perceived costs and rewards , and they have no emotional commitment to them , whereas they do have a very high stake in conformity and respectability . 

  Similarly , corporations are very much in the business of projecting a favourable image of themselves and their products , so that business might flourish . 

  Consequently , it appears that in principle at least , both corporations and their officials could be deterred , unlike their conventional counterparts . 

  But how ? 

  The history of penal practice is replete with particular sanctions falling into disuse . 

  Positive repentance is one such practice . 

  There was a period when deviants were publicly humiliated and self-confessions , accompanied with displays of repentance , were deemed necessary rungs in the ladder towards social reintegration . 

  This practice could be revived and applied to corporations ( Fisse 1971 ) . 

  When they behave illegally , they could be required to pay for publicizing their own failures , negligence , indifference , apathy , and greed , and also the names , photographs , and misdeeds of each corporate offender . 

  These adverts need not follow the insipid SMOKING CAN BE DANGEROUS FOR YOUR HEALTH recipe . 

  Instead , they could be imaginative products of creative advertising agencies , paid for by the offender(s ) , to persuade employees , consumers , and the general public to be cautious in the future of this corporation and its officials . 

  The idea of positive repentance for corporations has already been implemented in some American states , but the results have not been too impressive , largely because the logic of the sanction has not been followed through . 

  Thus the Federal Trade Commission instructed STP , a marketer of oil additives and other automotive products , to correct false , misleading , and fraudulent advertising claims , or face criminal prosecution . 

  The corporation chose the former ; the agency fined it $500,000 and instructed it to spend a further $200,000 in corrective advertising . 

  However , STP placed these adverts in such outlets as Business Week , Harvard Business Review , National Geographic , and Time Business Edition , whereas the original misleading advertisements appeared in such consumer-orientated journals as Auto News , Car and Driver , Hot Rod , Motor Age and Playboy ( Ermann and Lundman 1982 : 140 ) . 

  So those less likely to buy the products knew what these could and could not achieve , whilst potential consumers remained misguided by the original advertisements . 

  However , although this example reflects the failure of the Federal Trade Commission to think the sanction of positive repentance through to its logical conclusion , it also demonstrates just how powerful this sanction could be , had it been accompanied by just one further instruction -- " publish the repenting adverts in the original outlets " . 

  That STP deliberately chose to place the correct information in obscure papers read by financial enthusiasts rather than motor enthusiasts ( the two populations may overlap , but not by much ) indicates just how much of a deterrent positive repentance could be if properly executed . 

  When Philip Schrag ( 1971 ) became director of the New York Department of Consumer Affairs , he soon realized that companies could easily delay criminal prosecution cases , so he moved from a " judicial model " of control to a " direct action " model . 

  This included threats and use of adverse publicity , revocation of licences , writing directly to consumers to warn them of company practices , and exerting pressure on reputable financial institutions and suppliers to withdraw support of the targeted company . 

  In his view , this produced better results because the companies wished to avoid their respectability being tarnished . 

  There are , however , two major problems with a policy of imposing positive repentance directly , or in Schrag's case , indirectly . 

  First , the company may refuse or not be deterred . 

  Second , the regulatory agency may in response be able to impose a fine , but this would normally be small and ineffectual . 

  This leaves criminal prosecution as the only viable option . 

  But this would be a tiresome choice to make unless conviction were probable . 

  However , under the present arrangements for prosecuting corporations , convictions are very infrequent . 

  One of the major stumbling blocks in the criminal prosecution of corporations and their officials is that costs to the state become excessive as the case is stretched out for endless months and sometimes years . 

  According to Braithwaite ( 1981b ) there are numerous reasons why smart lawyers are able to accomplish this form of economic deterrence . 

  For example : 

  the complexity of the law enables them to discover loopholes and multiple meanings in the vague and often ambiguous wording of corporate law(s ) -- the pursuit of each interpretation is a further delay in the case reaching a conclusion ; 

  the complexity of company records , which are not only subject to mysterious , ( but relief-bringing ) disappearances down the corporation vortex , but when occasionally discovered are often so specialized and riddled with technical jargon that the average jurist finds them unintelligible -- naturally corporate lawyers render them intelligible in ways which favour their clients ; 

  the complexity of corporate structures , which often consist of so many subsidiaries and specialized divisions , within and beyond national boundaries , that unknotting the tangled thread of responsibility becomes difficult , if not impossible , thus making the view that " no one was to blame " easy to accept ; 

  the complexity of science , which renders forging a direct causal link between corporate practice and the death , injury , or economic loss of employees , consumers , and the general public , very difficult to prove " beyond a reasonable doubt " , particularly when those " experts " called in to testify to the relationship add so many qualifications and possibilities that almost everything appears possible but nothing certain . 

  All the above suggests that serious consideration should be given to abandoning judicial practices which protect the accused from arbitrary or unjust conviction , or which ensure they receive the benefit of the doubt , and exploring alternative judicial principles more relevant to prosecuting ( and convicting ) corporations and their officials ( Friedman 1979 ) . 

  For example , regulatory agencies should be strengthened , particularly in their legal departments , so that it would be possible to nurture a pool of state lawyers sufficiently specialized and experienced to be a fair match for corporate lawyers . 

  The " right to trial by jury " could also be abandoned . 

  Instead , trials could be heard by a panel of judges or juries especially selected for their ability to understand the complexities of cases against corporations . 

  The " limited " intrusion of " strict liability " into criminal law could be expanded to cover more and more corporate behaviour so that the issue of responsibility and intention becomes subsidiary to the more pressing need to compensate victims and make the offending corporation foot the bill . 

  Finally , maybe the " balance of probabilities " should be substituted for " beyond reasonable doubt " . 

  Achieving the latter is so difficult that attempts to put corporations and their officials down the hole they belong in are often stymied . 

  Whilst each of these may be attractive , they do raise a vexing question : would their acceptance represent an indefensible system of dual justice , one providing fewer rights to the accused and thus increasing the chances of conviction ? 

  It would be too easy to say " Yes , and not before time either . " 

  Clearly it would be difficult to justify a dual system of justice if it led to certain types of people being more easily convicted , for the whole concept of the rule of law was to tip the balance of power away from the accusing state to the accused individual because it was rightly felt a too one-sided contest without such protection . 

  But would the same objection have such weight if one judicial system applied to individuals and the other to corporations ( and other organizations ) ? 

  This question is crucial , for the essence of corporate crime is not the behaviour of individuals , but the " behaviour " of corporations . 

  It is , in other words , endemic within the corporation's standard operating procedure ( Hopkins 1980a ) , or is inherent within the nature of relationships between corporations and their environment in a world capitalist economy ( Barnett 1981 ) , or within the asymmetric power relationship between transnational corporations and national state regulatory agencies ( Braithwaite 1979b , 1981a ) . 

  Prosecuting individual corporate executives , particularly where some have the dubious " responsibility for going to jail " ( Braithwaite 1981b : 35 ) in exchange for premature elevation to a high salaried but non-responsible position , is simply missing the point . 

  In order to be effective , the level of intervention to regulate corporate crime has to be organizational rather than individual . 

  But it was not with this intervention level in mind that the rule of law and various protective judicial principles were formulated . 

  To grant these rights and judicial privileges to corporations ( and other organizations ) is simply to give them additional resources for a judicial battle in which many , particularly the transnationals , are already more than a fair match for national state regulatory agencies . 

  Indeed , it would be unjustified ( and plain silly ) to strengthen corporate power further by granting them judicial privileges originally formulated to protect relatively powerless individuals . 

  If it is agreed that to regulate corporate crime the level of intervention should be organizational ( although individual offenders should be prosecuted in tandem ) and different judicial principles to increase the state's chances of securing conviction should be instituted , then what ? 

  Ironically , it is just at the organizational level that ideas of deterrence , incapacitation , rehabilitation , and restitution to the community and the offended gain this season's attractive fashionable glow . 

  First , there is the issue of fines . 

  Their paltry and insignificant level has already been considered . 

  Clearly there is scope here for change . 

  Fines could at least be raised to a level comparable pro rata to a parking fine ! 

  But there is a limit to achieving justice through this judicial sanction . 

  If fines were so high that corporations went bankrupt , innocent employees , consumers , and dependents would suffer . 

  It would be wrong to make them pay the price of justice -- although this might nudge us into remembering that innocent wives and children and other dependents are made to suffer when the state imprisons thousands of working-class men for crimes which are often insignificant compared with corporate crimes . 

  Clearly a balance has to be located between a reasonable fine and one that cripples . 

  Given the rational nature of corporate crime , a higher level of fines than is imposed currently would probably deter some potential offenders . 

  But relying on this instrument is crude , lacks imagination , and does not achieve other goals desirable in the control and regulation of corporate crime ( Stone 1975 ) . 

  To prevent offenders repeating their misbehaviour , we no longer hang murderers , castrate rapists , or cut off thieves' hands . 

  Instead , we commit these and other offenders to varying terms of imprisonment . 

  This incapacitates them temporarily ; whilst imprisoned they can not victimize the public , although they do continue to victimize other prisoners , sometimes at a rate that exceeds community crime levels . 

  Indeed , according to Marvin Wolfgang ( Braithwaite 1981b : 15 ) the chances of being a victim of homicide in the US are five times as high for white males inside prison than for those outside . 

  The chances of being raped are also high ( Brownmiller 1975 : 257-67 ; Davis 1970 ) . 

  Corporate executives could be incapacitated by imprisonment ; whilst inside they could not be victimizing employees , consumers , share-holders , or the general public . 

  In addition , the fear of imprisonment may instil the fear of rape into young , smooth , neat , corporate executives -- as it did in the case of certain Watergate conspirators -- and lead to a dramatic and welcome improvement in their behaviour . 

  There is therefore some hope that imprisoning executives might , through incapacitation and deterrence , bring down the incidence of corporate crime . 

  But this must be a cautious and overly optimistic conclusion . 

  If corporations merely promoted or recruited new personnel to replace the faint-hearted or imprisoned , then frightening and removing executives to prison may have only a minimal impact on corporate crime . 

  There is however , a way round this : " imprison " all or part of the offending corporation . 

  By nationalizing for a specific period -- length depending upon the expected time needed for rehabilitation and the severity of the offence -- and placing public-appointed directors to the board with a duty to inform the public and advise the remaining corporate directors , the chances of recidivating could be reduced considerably . 

  Since no more is claimed for the incapacitation effect on conventional criminals , it appears reasonable to recommend it for offending corporations . 

  However , within the political climate of industrialized capitalistic societies , such " socialist " penal sanctions might well be viewed as draconian and ideologically repugnant . 

  There are though two other measures which would achieve the same limited objective and which appear more liberal in comparison with nationalizing ( imprisoning ) offending corporations . 

  The courts could impose a probation order . 

  This would not mean that an executive reports once a week to a local probation office to affirm that all is well back in the corporate suite . 

  It would mean that courts appoint teams of probation officers , drawn from a pool of accountants , lawyers , engineers , mechanics , chemists , physicists , management scientists , and so on , and selected to meet the requirements of each situation . 

  The purpose of the " new " probation-order team would be to monitor standard operating procedures , research programme strategies , communications networks , command structures , and any other structural factors which might be linked to the corporation's previous misbehaviour and then make recommendations which the company could not refuse to implement without the risk of revoking the probation licence and returning to court for resentencing . 

  Of course this liberal reform would mean a dramatic increase in the cost of the probation service . 

  Not only would their number have to be increased but they would also need to undergo years of specialized training for which they would expect a commensurate reward . 

  The attractiveness of this reform though is that it need not add to public expenditure . 

  Whereas conventional criminals lack the wherewithal to pay for being placed on probation , no such inability is true for corporations . 

  Consequently , the costs of strengthening and extending the probation service could be defrayed by charging a fee to the offending corporation . 

  This would be sufficient to guarantee that the public were not indirectly paying for the corporation's rehabilitation . 

  Another possibility is that the court could impose a community service order . 

  Under this a corporation could be required to , say , build a new hospital , or pay for a motorway , school , nursery , or library . 

  In this way badly needed public resources , which can not be easily paid for , could be met by those corporations whose financial reserves are sufficient for a proportion to be ploughed back into the community from which they were originally largely reaped . 

  An alternative form might be for the corporation to sell a proportion of its products at strictly cost price to those sections of the community who are under-privileged and in need of these occasional subsidies . 

  Finally , the court could act directly in the interests of the victims and instruct the corporation to compensate them . 

  This would avoid civil actions , which are often defeated because individual victims , even when they decide to act co-operatively , are rarely a match for corporations who decide it is better to be prudent than just . 

  For example , in early 1983 MP Jack Ashley was attempting to secure the passage of a Private Member's Bill through parliament which would require pharmaceutical companies to establish a " no blame compensation fund " . 

  This would enable victims to claim damages without facing the difficult task of proving corporate negligence before receiving any compensation . 

  The immediate cause of this putative legislation is the possibility that nearly 70 arthritic sufferers have died and nearly 4,000 have been injured as a result of taking the drug Opren . 

  As yet , the manufacturer has not paid civil damages because negligence has not been proven in court . 

  The selective imposition of fines , probation orders , community service orders , and compensation orders , particularly when coupled with " positive repentance " for the corporation and occasional imprisonment ( not for merely thirty days ) for executives would undoubtedly achieve the penal aims of deterrence , incapacitation , rehabilitation , and restitution better than the present system of token fines and infrequent short imprisonment sentences . 

  But for these to be achieved , a substantial proportion of offending corporations must first be caught . 

  To ensure a steady supply of corporations who could be prosecuted , other liberal reforms need to be considered . 

  An obvious major difference between corporate and conventional crime is that the former's victims often remain unaware . 

  This has considerable implications for regulating and controlling corporate crime . 

  Police work with conventional crime is primarily reactive ; it responds to victim-complaints . 

  If the regulatory agency relied on victim-complaints for corporate crime , then it might never find itself in business . 

  Relying , as they do , on irregular , inadequate , notified , and often superficial inspections , or on data provided by the corporations themselves renders state regulatory agencies and the police ( where they are relevant , as in say the fraud squad ) very defective in their ability to locate corporate crime . 

  Since a low rate of detection is a major encouragement to corporate crime , it might be necessary to pursue proactive policies such as deploying state spies and informers , entrapping corporate offenders , and strongly encouraging " whistle-blowing " or " grassing " . 

  It could be argued that since these are indefensible when applied , as they are currently , to conventional criminals , they ought not to be extended to corporate criminals . 

  But this argument needs considering . 

  It is easy to capture a large number of conventional criminals without needing to spy , entrap , or encourage " grassing " ; this is not true of corporate criminals who are extremely difficult to detect . 

  In many of the conventional crimes for which offenders receive imprisonment , there are no real victims . 

  For example , nearly one-quarter of people in prison are there because they were unable to pay their fine , others are there because of " consenting " sex below the age of consent , drug addiction , being drunk and disorderly , or begging abroad . 

  With corporate crime however , there are always victims and they are frequently numerous . 

  For their sakes , and the sakes of others who follow , more efficient means of apprehending offending corporations are desirable . 

  Finally , people who " grass " on conventional criminals constantly risk physical and sometimes fatal retribution , whereas corporate " informers " are dismissed and risk prolonged unemployment and career fracture . 

  The state is better able to protect the corporate " grass " because he ( or she ) could be guaranteed a job for life as a reward for information leading to conviction for a serious corporate crime . 

  BUT WOULD THESE IDEAS BE EFFECTIVE ? 

  In the film Hospital George C. Scott plays the administrator attempting to impose some order on the chaos of misadventure , accidents , and disasters passing themselves off as medical care . 

  In a moment of weary despair , he turns to a colleague and says , " It's like pissing into the wind ! " 

  There are reasons for believing that if the above liberal reforms were implemented , they might not significantly reduce the volume of corporate crime . 

  This is not , as Young ( 1981 : 328 ) asserts , because they are " well calculated to be ineffective " , but rather because they have not been framed with a crucial issue in mind -- how far can a national state regulatory agency effect the operations of a transnational corporation , particularly when its parental state is one of the two world imperialist powers ? 

  The history of corporate legislation enforcement is a history of penalizing the small fish whilst letting the big ones escape . 

  For example , Snider examined the enforcement of the Canadian Combine Investigation Act , 1889 , which makes it " illegal to conspire or arrange with another person to limit unduly the facilities to manufacture any article , or to prevent or lessen unduly competition in the manufacture or production of any article and to thereby increase the price " ( 1978 : 147 ) . 

  This is an indictable offence which carries a two years' prison sentence . 

  During the period 1961-73 , the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs was more likely to take out an enforcement order against a company that did not dominate the market , and was therefore in no position to affect the market price than one that did have such power ! 

  Snider argues that the presence of dominant companies " seems to make the government prosecutors more wary , probably because such companies always have the most skilled battery of lawyers who will pursue each case to the Supreme Court if possible " ( 1978 : 154 ) . 

  Goff and Reasons , after analysing the period 1952-72 , came to the same conclusion : " the Combines Branch has centred its attentions upon the investigations , prosecutions , and conviction of small-medium-sized companies and corporations , leaving the very largest corporations free to engage in their monopolistic practices " ( 1978 : 86 ) . 

  An analysis of enforcement practices in the US during the mid 1970s reached a similar conclusion : 

  " the amount of fine bears no systematic relation to the size of the firm . 

  In fact , of all fines imposed in 1975 and 1976 , the medium fine ... for large firms ( $1,000 ) was smaller than that for medium-size corporations ... 

  In addition , smaller fines were used in proportionately more cases involving the largest corporations : for these firms , 86 per cent of all fines were $5,000 or less , while only 6.5 per cent were over $45,000 . 

  The corresponding percentages for medium-sized corporates were 68 per cent and 18 per cent respectively and for smaller firms 54 and 38.5 per cent respectively . " 

  ( Clinard and Yeager 1980:126 ) 

  If the enforcement practices were strengthened and a more determined effort were now made to capture the big corporations , there would probably be a rude surprise . 

  Bigger fish might indeed be caught , but in the meantime they have grown into killer sharks with teeth big enough to bite through any net we might attempt to throw over them . 

  National corporations have become transnational corporations , and the concentration at the top of major world industries has become even more concentrated in the hands of transnationals . 

  The internationalization and concentration of capital would not be material to the control and regulation of corporate crime if transnationals were well behaved . 

  But the sad fact is , they are the worst offenders . 

  This emerged clearly from the recent , and as yet , most comprehensive survey of corporate crime in the US . 

  Clinard and Yeager's study involved : 

  " a systematic analysis of federal administrative , civil and criminal actions either initiated or completed by 25 federal agencies ... against the 477 largest publicly owned manufacturing corporations in the US during 1975 and 1976 . 

  In addition , a more limited study was made of the 105 largest wholesale , retail , and service corporations . " 

  ( Clinard and Yeager 1980 : 110-11 ) 

  However , even this study was restricted in its ability to portray the extent and incidence of corporation crime . 

  It was not able to cover financial , banking , and commercial corporations . 

  Neither was it able to cover all complaints made by employees , consumers , and the public . 

  Instead , it confined itself to actions initiated against corporations ( which is the equivalent to arrest/ prosecution ) and actions completed ( which is the equivalent to conviction ) . 

  Consequently , the study probably covered " only the tip of the iceberg of total violations , but they do constitute an index of illegal behaviour by the large corporations " ( Clinard and Yeager 1980 : 111 ) . 

  Clinard and Yeager discovered that violations were far more likely to be committed by large corporations . 

  Thus , if the corporations in their study were divided into three groups depending on the size of their annual sales , then they calculated that those with sales over $1 billion constituted 42 per cent of all corporations but committed nearly three-quarters of not only all violations but all serious violations , whereas those small firms with sales with less than half a billion dollars constituted nearly one-third of firms analysed but only committed less than 10 per cent of all violations . 

  Not only were the largest firms the most criminal , but those corporations that dominated " the oil , pharmaceutical and motor vehicle industries were the most likely to violate the law . " 

  ( Clinard and Yeager 1980 : 119 ) . 

  Relative to what their size warranted and depending on which type of offence was examined , the oil-refining industry committed crimes at a rate five to nine times higher than would be expected , the motor industry three to seven times , and the pharmaceutical industry was four to six times as criminal as would be predicted . 

  When it is realized that of the fifteen largest corporations in the world in 1978 , three were car manufacturers , eight were oil companies , and one was in chemicals , it can be appreciated that the largest corporations within the most concentrated sections of international capital formation are committing more than their share of law violations . 

  Furthermore , these giant corporations possess such wealth and power that they not only affect our lives , limbs , health , and property from the forceps to the grave , but they also bend the political democratic process in such a way that their interests are often prioritized over those of the electorate , consumers , employees , and shareholders . 

  The outcome is that national states , which exist to prevent life being poor , nasty , short , brutal , and solitary , are a match for the unreasonable person who commits conventional crimes , but " are no match for the resources and size of ... great corporations : General Motors could buy Delaware ... if DuPont were willing to sell it " ( Nader and Green 1973 : 79 ) . 

  In the final analysis , it may be that national states and their control agencies are relatively autonomous of a particular social class , and that in that sense could , under the right circumstances , become an instrument , at least for a specific and limited objective , of any particular class or alliance of classes or pressure groups . 

  Under their temporary influence , the state could introduce some or all of the liberal reforms outlined above . 

  These would undoubtedly deter smaller corporations and bring down the incidence of corporate crime , particularly amongst the relatively smaller national-bound corporations , and even those larger corporations whose capital equipment is relatively fixed and who need the local more specialized work force . 

  If capital transfer to other countries was also made illegal or tightly controlled , this would also help to prevent corporations evading the law by exporting those behaviours which would be illegal in one country to another where they are not . 

  However , even these barriers would hot prevent forever a corporation determined to maximize its interests . 

  Neither would a sovereign state's government necessarily want to oppose transnational corporations , for the former often find themselves in the unenviable position of needing the latter more than the latter need them . 

  A clear example of this is provided by Carson ( 1981 ) in his analysis of the other price of Britain's oil . 

  He argues that in order to extract Britain's oil reserves fast -- a policy objective pursued dogmatically by all governments over the last fifteen years -- it was necessary to depend upon the transnational oil companies . 

  They agreed to extract oil quickly , but argued they would not be able to do so if hindered by trifling safety regulations that applied to on-shore industries . 

  To disarm reluctant government ministers , the transnationals pointed out that there were other vast reserves in South America , Mexico , and Alaska , and that rather than find themselves restricted with petty regulations they would prefer to spend vast amounts on exploratory research elsewhere . 

  British governments had no strength to resist these arguments , and as a consequence the North Sea Oil installations , working literally at break-neck speed unfettered by safety regulations comparable to those operating on-shore , had a fatality rate eleven times greater than the construction industry , nine times higher than mining , and six times greater than quarrying . 

  Carson concludes , after carefully researching the individual incidents which constituted this high rate of fatality ( as well as those involving serious injuries ) that the majority could have been avoided if the " political economy of speed " had not been allowed to supersede the " political economy of employees lives and limbs " . 

  With the internationalization of capital and the concentration of power in the hands of fewer and fewer transnational corporations , national law violation may well become old fashioned . 

  These giant corporations may simply opt for law evasion . 

  That is , they may choose to export , say , plants emitting too much ( illegal ) pollution , or manufacturing processes where the labour costs are legally maintained at a " high " level , or products banned for safety reasons , to other countries where pollution laws , legal wage levels , and product safety regulations are all less stringent . 

  The exportation of " corporate crime " will normally be to Third World countries which , because they are more dependent upon capital , have fewer resources to check manufacturer's claims or police corporate activities , and because their officials are more susceptible to corruption are less likely to circumvent corporate behaviour . 

  This is a depressing conclusion for liberal reformers . 

  National states simply may not possess the will or power to " knock the stuffing " out of the worst corporate offenders . 

  Maybe persuasion , based upon appeals to ethical considerations and the flickering embers of nationalism are the only tools left to crack corporate crime . 

  But they will not succeed where the law has failed . 

  If there is no preparedness to see extensive nationalization of the worst offending corporations and if there is no political or national will to place public officials on the boards of directors to guarantee that " our " interests are given as much consideration as those of the corporation , then clearly the will to control corporations has atrophied in the withering light of pragmatism . 

  Maybe smaller corporations can be deterred , but any attempt to constrain seriously the large transnational corporations will ultimately affect us adversely where it hurts most -- in our economic performance . 

  So better to become subservient than to waste our energies attempting to bring the worst criminal organizations to justice . 

  But if that is the depressing conclusion , then it has implications for our treatment of conventional criminals . 

  In 1981 , there were nearly 85,000 males and 4,000 females received into prison under sentence in England and Wales . 

  Of these 20,000 males and 1,100 females ( nearly 25 per cent and about 30 per cent respectively ) were imprisoned for defaulting on fine payments . 

  Can it be justified to send to prison people too poor to pay fines -- and there are more such persons during times of economic crisis -- not only when the original crime of which they were convicted did not warrant a prison sentence , but when their crime is trivial in the extreme in comparison with corporate crimes which we lack the political will to tackle directly by socialist remedies ? 

  By the same logic , can it be right to send people to prison because they have been found guilty of drunkenness , vagrancy , offences related to prostitution , and drug offences ( of whom there were nearly 900 men and 100 women in 1981 ) ? 

  Maybe such considerations will also mellow our attitude towards the imprisonment of nearly 9,000 men and 500 women ( representing nearly 25 and 45 per cent respectively of all those sentenced to immediate imprisonment ) for theft , handling stolen goods , fraud , and forgery , when the amounts of value involved are nothing in comparison with the millions stolen by offending corporations on whom our criminal justice system has given up . 

  If there is no way of implementing justice for the largest and worst offending corporations then it is surely unjust to pursue with such ruthless and cruel tenacity the majority of those eventually condemned to prison . 

  By all means punish those committing violence against us , but when we fail to punish those practising minor acts of genocide , let us be merciful on those committing comparatively minor acts of violence . 

  If that is too hard to stomach , then the political will should be discovered or constructed so that our government will pursue vigorously and ruthlessly all those , including transnational corporations , who violate laws , particularly those designed to protect our lives and limbs . 

  If the price of achieving justice for offending corporations is a more socialized mode of production , that may be a price worth paying if our lives , limbs , and property are protected from predatory transnational corporations . 

  The Building of the House 

  " It must be useful . 

  It must work dependably . 

  It must be beautiful . 

  It must last . 

  It must be the best of its kind . " 

  Alfred Dunhill's maxim , 1907 

  The idea of a specially designed dolls' house for Queen Mary , the wife of King George V , was first conceived in the spring of 1921 by a first cousin of the King , Princess Marie Louise . 

  Born in 1872 , the Princess was the youngest daughter of Queen Victoria's fifth child , the Princess Helena and her husband Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein . 

  Although at the age of not quite two , her maternal grandmother described her as " Poor little Louise very ugly " , photographs show that she was not an unattractive woman . 

  However , her private life was not a happy one and her early marriage ended in annulment . 

  Her chief satisfaction was to come from the friends she later made from the worlds of music , art and literature . 

  The Princess was a childhood friend of the Queen and a firm favourite with King George V. Her family's home was Cumberland Lodge in Windsor Great Park , and it was here , after visiting the King and Queen at Windsor during the Easter of 1921 , that she watched her mother and sister assembling a collection of miniature furniture for the Queen . 

  By the 1920s Queen Mary's mania for collecting had become well known throughout her family and the British Empire . 

  Her methods of acquisition ranged from chance discoveries and bargain purchases in shops to point-blank admiration of other people's possessions , which found some owners parting with their treasures as gifts , while others hid their bibelots when it was known that a visit from the Queen was imminent . 

  She was an enthusiastic if somewhat undiscerning collector of antiques , but it was a genuine love of " tiny craft " that filled endless rooms and corridors with specially lit glass cabinets of miniature objects . 

  All this went through Princess Marie Louise's mind , and on impulse she suggested to her family that she should ask her great friend , the architect Sir Edwin Lutyens , to design a dolls' house for the Queen's personal pleasure . 

  At the private view of that year's Royal Academy Summer Exhibition she met the architect and put the proposition to him . 

  Between 1912 and 1928 Lutyens was responsible for redesigning eighty square miles of offices , avenues and palaces in New Delhi to house the British Government in India , an undertaking that kept him out of England for the best part of every winter . 

  In spite of these absences and the decline of country house building during the First World War , the Twenties saw a steady stream of commissioned work from the Lutyens drawing board . 

  It was , however , his permanent design of the deceptively simple 1920 Whitehall Cenotaph ( originally erected in wood and plaster as a saluting point for the Victory March Past of Allied troops in July 1919 ) that put him in the eye of the general public and for the first time turned Lutyens into a household name . 

  From his earliest childhood , when to draw meant to think " and draw a line round my think " , Edwin Landseer Lutyens ( 1869-1944 ) had had a phenomenal memory for detail . 

  He was the tenth child of the retired army captain and professional horse artist Charles Lutyens , and his beautiful Irish wife Mary . 

  Of an inquiring mind , he also , according to his youngest daughter , Mary Lutyens , combined a natural gift for mathematics with " a creative imagination of genius " . 

  The architect's marriage to the eccentric Lady Emily Lytton might have been a basis for social success , but , in fact , she was too shy to help his career . 

  Lutyens's underlying sense of inferiority , the result of an impoverished childhood and lack of public school education , was in part responsible for a life beset with financial and marital despondency . 

  Sir Edwin Lutyens in the 1920s in a " Napoleon " armchair , two of which are in the Dolls' House library . 

  His design for these chairs was a favourite one with the architect and was inspired by a well-known seated portrait of the Emperor . 

  However , his innate charm and style , together with his availability for fashionable luncheon and dinner parties , made him a popular guest in London society in the Twenties . 

  It says much for the sense of humour of the untidy , bespectacled architect that after the initial shock of the Princess's request , he accepted the relatively minor commission of building a dolls' house for the Queen with enthusiasm , and immediately visited the Princess to discuss the project , bringing with him a mutual friend , Sir Herbert Morgan , President of the Society of Industrial Artists . 

  All three were aware that the King and Queen had , after four years of war , come to represent to their subjects all that was best in the domestic and public virtues , and that there had been current for some time an idea of presenting to them a gift as a mark of national respect , thanks and loyalty . 

  The prospective idea of the dolls' house began to fall into place . 

  In the aftermath of the First World War , many skilled British craftsmen were out of work . 

  From every aspect theirs was a changing world . 

  The new political atmosphere challenged the self-satisfied pecking order of the social ladder of pre-war years , and made certain that an accepted way of life had changed for ever . 

  But the craftsmen's talents were crippled by unemployment , while high taxation on the former governing classes made it difficult for them to commission buildings or goods of a quality acceptable to Lutyens and his contemporaries . 

  In an attempt to boost a moral and economic recovery , the government had announced that the renaissance of a country " fit for heroes to live in " was to be put to the test in the spring of 1924 . 

  Based on an original pre-war idea of Lord Strathcona , the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Park in Middlesex was to be the showpiece of the Empire , co-ordinating undeveloped wealth and untapped resources with scientific research in a celebration of human enterprise . 

  Lutyens and his friends , among them Sir Lawrence Weaver , Director Designate of the United Kingdom exhibits at the exhibition , quickly realised that the building of the dolls' house could easily be integrated into this project , and would be an invaluable advertisement to promote the names and products of the top British designers , craftsmen and artists of the time . 

  The next step was to enquire whether Queen Mary would accept such a gift . 

  Princess Marie Louise went to the Queen and told her about the scheme . 

  Her Majesty " was extremely surprised at first but then her artistic and historical sense was fired and she agreed " . 

  The Queen also gave permission for the house to be shown at the forthcoming British Empire Exhibition . 

  It would be displayed in a special gallery in the Palace of Arts and the proceeds from the small fee charged for admission would be added to the fund set up by the Queen for the benefit of her many charitable concerns . 

  The Queen was adamant that the Princess should act as an intermediary between the architect , those involved with the house and herself , so that she could be a party to all their ideas . 

  After Her Majesty's initial acceptance of the enterprise , Sir Herbert Morgan hosted a large private dinner party at the Savoy to which he , the Princess and Lutyens invited various mutual friends , authors and artists whom they wished to involve . 

  At the dinner the topic of conversation came round to a discussion of how historically interesting it would have been if people living in Saxon or medieval England had produced scale models of houses built in those days . 

  There would have been the ill-lit halls , impractical sanitary arrangements , filthy rush-laid floors and sparsely furnished rooms ; and if period duplicates had existed of Elizabethan interiors or classical Queen Anne houses that showed the inadequate lighting , heating and plumbing of the sixteenth , seventeenth and eighteenth centuries , how much easier , the guests agreed , it would be to appreciate the modern refinements which their own contemporaries took so much for granted . 

  Excitement mounted ; in her memoirs Princess Marie Louise quotes Sir Edwin Lutyens as saying , " Let us devise and design for all time something which will enable future generations to see how a king and queen of England lived in the twentieth century , and what authors , artists and craftsmen of note there were during their reign . " 

  By this time Lutyens was drawing on every menu card available -- not even the napkins and tablecloths escaped -- enthusiastically filling them with plans and designs . 

  No detail was to be considered too trivial or unimportant ; from the attic to the cellar the house was to be a national treasure , an accurate record for children , adults , and future historians , and a monument in minute perfection of all that was best in British workmanship . 

  No one was to be called upon to delve too deeply into his pocket , it was agreed . 

  Everything was to be paid for by gifts and private donations . 

  Sir Herbert Morgan took it upon himself to act as chairman of an unofficial committee to help realise the three-year project . 

  In the weeks following the dinner Lutyens swiftly drew up an elaborate set of plans . 

  The house was a completely original design -- neither the interior nor the exterior were copies of any existing royal palace , building or other Lutyens commission . 

  Nor , after the first enthusiastic drawings on the tablecloths of the Savoy , was there any idea of designing a royal house as such . 

  The administrative requirements of a royal household would not have conformed with Lutyens's final conception , which was to show an English gentleman's home between the wars . 

  It became in essence the very house that , had his private life been otherwise , he would have liked to live in himself . 

  Unhampered by a client's needs , he threw himself into a legitimate extension of his pipe dream : the Dolls' House became his home . 

  Nevertheless , he felt that it was only correct that the recipient of such a gift should also feel at ease there , and indeed it very quickly became the " home " of the Queen as well . 

  By October 1921 , Her Majesty's diary records that she " went to see the Dolls' House which Sir Edwin Lutyens and the British artists are giving me and are decorating for me ... 

  I met there Mr Philpot who will paint the ceiling in my bedroom ... " 

  A distinctive feature of the Dolls' House was that almost without exception every item in it was specifically commissioned and an integral part of the whole gift -- only a few pieces in the house were found in the antique trade or private collections . 

  Lutyens took command of the operation , filing it in his brain under " vivreations " , his personal word for fun . 

  Artefacts were manufactured in the finest of the United Kingdom workshops and factories of the era , and the Twining Model Co. was chosen to assist the manufacturers where necessary . 

  It is easy to forget that the Lutyens team of craftsmen only had access to traditional methods and materials . 

  There were , for example , none of today's super-speed resins , or epoxy glues . 

  Fish-bone paste and heated animal glue made a long process of bonding work , whilst injection moulding and plastics did not exist . 

  However , there was available to them an unlimited quantity of quality seasoned wood , excellent metals and fabrics , and sound examples of rare stone , all worked by men whose seven-year apprenticeships made them masters of their craft . 

  The press quickly picked up rumours of the project and upset Lutyens with garbled and inaccurate descriptions : " Such a bore , " he wrote to his wife . 

  By August 1921 he was " inundated by the press and all sorts of undesirables have offered things " . 

  Everyone , it seemed , was anxious to contribute , and " Oh , the rubbish that turns up for the Dolls' House . " 

  Once Lutyens had sought out and co-ordinated the ideas of nearly 1,500 tradesmen , artists and authors with the gifts and donations from private sources , the Dolls' House Committee under the chairmanship of Sir Herbert Morgan was delegated to pursue items to furnish the house . 

  Lutyens himself ordered several of them . 

  In a letter of 17 August 1921 to his wife he writes that " I have had the first estimates for dolls' house furniture : 13 State frames -- 50 , and have sent it to Mrs Marshall Field . 

  " This was the " first attempt to land a fish " and he went on to say that he awaited the reply with interest . 

  Omitting to tell his wife , he personally assumed financial responsibility for up to 11,000 and it was not until the house arrived at Wembley in March 1924 that he recovered the 6,300 that he had spent , and finally admitted to Lady Emily that he had been " rather fearful of death before repayment as it would have hit me badly ! " 

  The initial shell of the model was erected in his Delhi office at Apple Tree Yard in London , and Royal Academicians involved in the painting of the various walls and ceilings crossed Piccadilly many times to be presented to Queen Mary or to exchange views and opinions with each other . 

  Lutyens's verdict was law , and nothing escaped his personal praise or criticism . 

  Later , after a door and part of his office wall had been demolished to allow its removal , the house was taken to the drawing room of his house in Mansfield Street , depriving his family of the room's use for nearly two years . 

  His pigtailed youngest daughter , Mary , found that her quick eye and nimble " old enough to be trusted " fingers were invaluable in the unpacking , placing and appreciation of the tiny articles that arrived almost hourly by carrier . 

  To the thirteen-year-old schoolgirl and her father the house was their own private world and enclosed them in a relationship of unexpected depth . 

  The Queen kept a sharp eye on the proceedings , and found it a favourable wet-day pastime to visit the Dolls' House . 

  Once she came to Mansfield Street with the King , and stayed over four hours , arranging and playing with everything , much to the chagrin of a lady in waiting who was kept firmly outside the drawing room ! 

  In January 1924 , when the house was nearing completion , she went twice in four days , first with her son " Georgie " , the Duke of Kent , when they spent one and a half hours " going over the beautiful miniature things " , as she records in her diary , and later with a friend when she " arranged some of the rooms " . 

  Eleven weeks before the opening of the British Empire Exhibition ( where for the first time the King's speech was transmitted by wireless to every part of the country and many parts of the British Empire ) , the house with every item in place was ready to be presented to both the Queen and the public . 

  Still in the drawing room at Mansfield Street , it was unveiled to an eager press , and the national and provincial newspapers of 8 February 1924 carried the first photographs and ecstatic descriptions of this " perfect house of today in miniature " . 

  Finally in early March the house left the Mansfield Street drawing room ready to be reconstructed in its own Lutyens-designed pavilion in the Palace of Arts at Wembley . 

  Packed into numbered wooden crates , simply stencilled THE QUEEN'S DOLLS' HOUSE it left dirt and chaos in its wake , " ... oh , the mess ... it's awful , I must put it clean , " wrote its creator to his wife , as he surveyed the wreckage of his Adam drawing room , " but it will take a long time ! " 

  Nine days later the Queen noted in her diary of 25 March that she had walked " about four miles around the exhibition buildings and so on . 

  Most interesting ... visited the Palace of Arts and the small pavilion where my Dolls' House is to stand ... " 

  By April 1924 the head of every firm involved had received from Buckingham Palace a signed letter in Queen Mary's own hand describing the Dolls' House as " the most perfect present that anyone could receive " , and an invitation to visit it at the Palace of Arts . 

  On 24 June she wrote her final thank you to the architect , asking him to accept a signed photograph of herself " in remembrance of the trouble you have taken concerning my beautiful Dolls' House " . 

  She continued : 

  I know how much thought and care you have expended on this wonderful work of art which is such a joy to look at , and I , as the proud possessor of this house , can never be sufficiently grateful to you for having given so much of your time in order to give me pleasure . 

  The crowds of visitors to the Dolls' House at Wembley are a proof that the public do appreciate your work . 

  With many many thanks , believe me , yours very sincerely , Mary R 

  Visited by 1,617,556 people , the house was exhibited during the first year of the Wembley Exhibition between April and November 1924 . 

  At the close of the exhibition for that year , it was sent to Windsor Castle . 

  In December 1924 a press release stated that Her Majesty the Queen had graciously given permission for the house to be exhibited at the ninth Ideal Home Exhibition to be held by the Daily Mail at Olympia the following March . 

  In February 1925 , packed into 45 cases weighing altogether 42 tons , it arrived at Olympia in West Kensington . 

  Kept under police guard day and night , it took three days to reassemble the building and its contents . 

  An extra charge of one shilling ( 5p ) was made for permission to view the house , and the 5,500 it made was added to the Queen's charitable fund . 

  At the close of the exhibition in March the house was returned to Windsor Castle . 

  By July of that year Lutyens had finished adapting a disused china room beneath the Throne Room for its permanent position , and the house was opened again to the public for a charge of sixpence ( 2 p ) per person , this charge , as always , going into Her Majesty's charitable fund . 

  The Queen accepted the offer made by the directors of the Daily Mail of the Pilkington " flat " glass case through which the modern public now view it . 

  Contrary to speculation , the house has not been lent out to a public exhibition since 1925 , but remains where it was designed to stand , the only completely untouched Lutyens house in existence , a permanent record of a way of life between the wars . 

  The architect with King George V and Queen Mary and the Duke and Duchess of York admire the house at the Wembley Exhibition , 2 May 1924 . 

  The china souvenirs can be seen displayed in the background . 

  The house in the making , showing the electric wiring and plumbing system . 

  Every firm and manufacturer involved with the house received a copy of this letter from the Queen . 

  Many of these letters can be found today in family archives . 

  Miniature of a 16-foot " Palakona " split bamboo salmon fly rod . 

  In three pieces , the length when assembled is 16 inches . 

  It was made for the Dolls' House by Hardy Bros Ltd. and presented by Mr W. Hardy , father of today's Marketing Director , Mr James Hardy , who found this invitation discarded with some rubbish when the factory moved in 1965 . 

  The house being packed up in the Mansfield Street drawing room . 

  Lady Emily found it easiest to ignore this room for two years ! 

  The Shell 

  " The Queen writes she is nervous as to how the Dolls' House opens and asks questions about the hall door . " 

  Letter from Sir Edwin Lutyens to Lady Emily , 17 August 1921 

  The Queen's worry as to how the Dolls' House opened was a perfectly reasonable one . 

  The plans showed over forty rooms and vestibules on four elevations , with two staircases , two lifts that stopped at every floor , hot and cold running water in all five bathrooms , water closets that flushed , electric light , a cellar , a garage and a garden . 

  Lutyens solved the problem with the simple device of a closely-fitting outer shell that could be raised and lowered over the inner fabric of the house from machinery installed in its roof space . 

  Lutyens had been using classical detail in some form or other since his earliest years as an architect . 

  His chief inspiration came from Christopher Wren , and by the early 1900s this influence in Lutyens's work was paramount : he called it his " Wrenaissance " . 

  The outer shell of the Dolls' House is in classical " Wrenaissance " design with the main facade on the north side . 

  The use of real stone would have made the shell too heavy to move , and so carved and painted wood to represent the creamy white of Lutyens's favourite Portland stone was used . 

  Built on a scale of 1 to 12 , the house is 102 inches long on the main north and south fronts , 58 inches from east to west at ground floor level and is five feet high at parapet level . 

  It stands on a base 39 inches high measuring 116 inches by 72 inches . 

  On the north and south sides , the base is divided into a sub-base 24 inches high , each side containing 104 interchangeable cedar-wood drawers 11 inches long and 3 inches wide and deep to store the contents when necessary . 

  The upper 15 inches of the base on the north side hides the machinery for the lifts , the electrical gear , and the tank for the water wastes , a system which no longer functions . 

  On the south side a corresponding basement is hidden by a drawer flap which , when pulled down , reveals the cellar with its groined roof . 

  The western basement is the garage , hidden in a drawer . 

  The flap lets down and the floor extends , leaving the five car bays under the main building . 

  Gertrude Jekyll's garden is laid out on the eastern side , in a drawer which extends more fully than the garage . 

  Every room has a fireplace and the double chimney stack rises through the steeply-pitched hipped roof . 

  This is covered with real slates and opens upwards on the north side to show the storage space for the top of the Otis lift mechanism , and the rest of the now disused water system . 

  The lead statues of the four patron saints of the British Isles stand on the corners of the roof balustrade . 

  St George and St Andrew face north , while St David and St Patrick , holding the last Irish snake , face south . 

  With the exception of the ground floor on the north and south sides , which are fitted with French casement doors , the windows are all sliding sashes double hung with lines and weights . 

  All the facades are richly embellished with swags and classical ornamentation . 

  Immense care has been given to the carving of the flowers and musical instruments , and each mythological face carries a different expression . 

  The inner shell is constructed in four superimposed horizontal sections . 

  To accommodate the lofty ceilings of some of the main rooms , Lutyens used the traditional architectural solution of inserting extra or mezzanine rooms on all four fronts . 

  It was an accepted custom for architects of standing to include in their plans designs for chimney pieces and fireplaces , as well as the usual fittings , and throughout the house several pieces of furniture that Lutyens had designed either for himself or other clients are also represented . 

  The Indian Government sent as a gift pieces of twelve different kinds of coloured marble which the architect deployed throughout the house , using their colours as a focus for the interior decoration . 

  Lawrence Weaver , whose work as an author had contributed much to Lutyens's recognition as an architect , wrote of the Dolls' House in 1924 that " The planning of a strictly symmetrical house like this is one of the shrewdest tasks that can be set an architect . " 

  He went on to explain that the rules of the game could easily be encompassed if some rooms were left without windows , and if the facades did not accurately represent the layout of the interior . 

  Apart , though , from one or two short cuts in the domestic offices -- hardly surprising when basement space had to be taken up with loaded drawers of garage and garden -- Sir Edwin Lutyens , Weaver declared , " has played his most difficult game of planning with serious ingenuity and success " . 

  On the north side of the house the royal coat of arms is set into the classical pediment 

  Interchangeable cedar-wood storage drawers on the north and south sides of the base 

  On the south side , over her bedroom window , Queen Mary's coat of arms projects between two Corinthian columns . 

  The supporters are the lion of England on the left and on the right , showing her German paternal ancestry , the stag of Wrttemberg . 

  The structure was made by J. Parnell &amp;amp; Son of Rugby . 

  The external and internal painting was executed and donated by the firm of Muntzer &amp;amp; Son , Lutyens's own principal decorators . 

  The oak flagstaff flies the Queen's standard . 

  There is also a King's standard in store in one of the cedar drawers . 

  The Hall and Games Cupboard 

  The entrance to the house is through the central glazed doors on the north side , which open into the twenty-inch-wide hall . 

  Lutyens's handling of space was a notable feature of his work , and the main hall of the Dolls' House , rising through three floors with lobbies on either side to give access to the main apartments , is particularly successful in this respect . 

  The staircase and walls are of white marble , with the addition of lapis lazuli for the geometrical floor pattern . 

  The two lanterns which hang from the zodiac ceiling are the architect's own design , and the method of covering the rod with silk cord and tassel was one that he often used in houses he designed . 

  The grandfather clock in an oak case is one of seven clocks and two barometers in the house . 

  Mainly designed by Lutyens , these cases and movements are all in working order and were a combined gift to the Queen from the London and Paris workshops of Cartier Ltd . 

  Passing through the right-hand lobby , glazed doors shut off the passenger lift which serves three floors and a well-equipped games cupboard . 

  The games cupboard contains equipment for croquet , cricket , golf and tennis . 

  Previous pages : The visitors' book is on the hall table . 

  The large oil painting of Windsor Castle by D. Y. Cameron measures 8 by 5 inches in its gilt frame . 

  Opposite : The cricket bat was made by John Wisden &amp;amp; Co . 

  Ltd. , and is shown here against a modern standard-size ball . 

  The golf clubs and bag were made and donated by J. T. Gowdie &amp;amp; Co . 

  The bag is 2 inches high . 

  The Library 

  " ... 

  My old , dear and intimate friend Princess Marie Louise , who furnishing the Queen's Dolls' House , asked me some months ago to let twelve poems of mine be copied small to form one volume in the library ; and I selected the twelve shortest and simplest and least likely to fatigue the attention of dolls or the illustrious House of Hanover . " 

  From the Collected Letters of A. E. Housman . 

  To Grant Richards , 4 May 1923 

  Reached through the right-hand hall lobby , the library runs the full length of the ground floor on the west front . 

  By the early twentieth century , it was not unusual for the library to be a masculine combination of gun room , study and smoking room , and the Dolls' House library has a cluttered family atmosphere , scattered as it is with periodicals , newspapers , cards and dice . 

  Panelled from floor to cornice in walnut , it has the lowest ceiling of all the main rooms . 

  The shadowy Roman theme of the painting on the fluted and coffered ceiling was purposely " aged " by its artist , William Walcot . 

  The furniture and the silver chandeliers were designed by Lutyens . 

  British rulers have made collections of books down the ages , and the library portraits of the English kings Henry VII ( 1485-1509 ) , Henry VIII ( 1509-1547 ) and Queen Elizabeth I ( 1558-1603 ) acknowledge these monarchs' contributions to the sixteenth-century Renaissance of learning in England . 

  King George III ( 1760-1820 ) collected what is now the King's Library in the British Library , and Queen Mary herself had a library of nearly five thousand volumes by the end of her life . 

  There are two unique aspects to the collection of books in the Dolls' House library . 

  The greater part of the literature was commissioned from living authors , being either new work for the purpose ( in which case they made a gift of the copyright to the Queen ) , or their own selection from published work . 

  Their books are in manuscript , often the author's handwriting , and some are illustrated with specially drawn pictures . 

  The library also carries a quota of printed material . 

  Amongst it , there is a full set of Shakespeare , several bibles and a Koran , a volume of Charles Dickens and all the usual reference books . 

  The manufacture of the books that fill the movable shelves was often fraught with technical problems . 

  St John Hornby , owner of the private Ashenden Press , found his 1 by 1&amp;amp;1/ 4 inch gift of Horace's Carmina Sapphica reduced to pulp after an overnight stay in a full-sized binding press . 

  Princess Marie Louise was the librarian , and she and her friend , the author E. V. Lucas , catalogued and organized the library . 

  A representative rather than a complete library was aimed at and , after selection , the Princess wrote personally to 171 favoured authors of the time . 

  George Bernard Shaw was the only one who did not accept with alacrity the invitation to contribute to the library , and , in the Princess's own words , he refused " in a very rude manner " . 

  Princess Marie Louise also turned her persuasion and charm on no less than 700 artists . 

  She asked them to donate a collection of drawings , watercolours and sketches as well as etchings , lino prints and engravings on metal . 

  These are laid flat , and with scaled plans of the house are stored in the standard way of such collections , in the two large cabinets on the library floor . 

  In fact , the Princess rather overdid this commission for , to keep their pictures flat , most artists pasted their work onto stiff cardboard , thus seriously reducing the space allotted to them in the cabinets . 

  The surplus drawings were therefore catalogued and stored in drawers in the northern basement . 

  Princess Marie Louise borrowed the King's dispatch boxes and sent them off to be copied . 

  The King was much intrigued to see them in the Dolls' House and enquired who gave her permission . 

  She records that he was somewhat surprised when she announced that she had " just asked for them " ! 

  Above the Chubb safe on the right of the picture , and noticeably empty behind the terrestrial globe , is the gun cupboard . 

  The King was a famous shot , and decided to place the pair of Purdey shot guns from it on a cabinet top ( centre left ) where they could be more easily admired . 

  Too small to fire ( they are only 4 inches long ) , the Dolls' House guns break and load and are typical Purdeys , with two triggers and a top lever . 

  The stocks are finished in wood and fitted with half pistol grips similar to the King's own guns . 

  Purdey's have been gunmakers to the royal family since Queen Victoria's time , and the miniature pair was donated by Athol Purdey , grandson of the firm's founder , in a traditional leather gun case complete with cleaning rod , tow and oil . 

  The gift also included a shooting stick made to the King's personal pattern , a magazine holding a hundred cartridges and a leather cartridge bag . 

  The book-binding in the library was the work of seven firms . 

  Most prominent among them was Sangorski &amp;amp; Sutcliff , a firm much used by Lutyens personally , and also responsible for the cyphered design on the leather shelf edging in the library . 

  William Nicholson's portrait of Queen Elizabeth I , based on the sixteenth-century Armada Portrait by an unknown artist . 

  The Royal George . 

  Built in 1817 , she was the royal yacht of King George III . 

  Briar pipes with the famous white Dunhill spot . 

  Cigars , cigarettes and tobacco were donated by Alfred Dunhill , founder of the firm and grandfather of today's chairman Matches donated by Bryant &amp;amp; May Ltd . 

  The Swan fountain pen and inkwell are filled from a large blue bottle of Stephens's ink . 

  Photographed on a full-sized volume from Queen Mary's collection in the Royal Library at Windsor Castle , this book is the smallest amongst the original contributions , measuring only 1 inch by 7:8 inches . 

  It approximates to a miniature octavo book , while others in the Dolls' House library are more like reduced folios . 

  The walnut writing table has nine drawers in front and two cupboards at the back . 

  Cartier made the desk clock sans mouvement . 

  It is only JJ inch high . 

  The portrait in the lacquer photograph frame is of the King of the Belgians . 

  The ex libris plate stuck into all the books was designed by Ernest Shepard , who illustrated the Winnie the Pooh books . 

  Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's contribution to the two hundred books on the library shelves was a short story of 500 words in his own handwriting . 

  Rudyard Kipling threw himself with zest into his offering for the library , choosing several poems , among them " If " and " The Road through the Woods " . 

  He illustrated them with special drawings . 

  The one shown here is from " A Charm " . 

  King George V was an avid stamp collector and this album donated by Stanley Gibbons contains facsimiles of both English and Colonial stamps . 

  Three of the 700 drawings stored in the Dolls' House . 

  The Kitchen , Scullery , Pantry and Kitchen Service Lobby 

  " Cookery is become an art , a noble science . " 

  Robert Burton , 1577-1640 

  The kitchen is the main room on the south side of the ground floor . 

  It is flanked on the right by the scullery and on the left by a service lobby with entrances to both the east side pantry and the dining room . 

  Lutyens's ideal of an orderly life run by efficient , invisible servants is more than realised in this immaculately appointed domain . 

  Deep cupboards in both the scullery and pantry house the necessary quantities of glass and china , and deep double sinks in both rooms make up for the lack of the modern dishwasher . 

  The size of the taps throughout the house is one of the few exceptions to scale , as an exact one twelfth in the plumbing system would have been too small for water to run through the pipes . 

  The specially designed plate rack in the scullery can drain the ninety plates of different sizes used for a five-course dinner for eighteen , whilst the slate floor makes for easy cleaning . 

  Much of the china bears the back-plate of Thomas Goode &amp;amp; Co . 

  Ltd . 

  One of the best known china shops in the world and holder of warrants to no less than nine royal houses before the First World War , the company commissioned and sold glass and china from different factories . 

  Queen Mary was one of the firm's patrons and Goode's undertook to co-ordinate and in many cases donate glass and china throughout the house . 

  As in many large houses of today and yesterday , the names of Minton , Doulton and Wedgwood run through the Dolls' House china cupboards . 

  For the kitchen china , marked with a " K " to distinguish it from the nursery china marked with an " N " , as well as the storage jars with printed names on the kitchen shelves , Doulton china was used because of its reputation for being hard-wearing . 

  Although the kitchen is measured in inches and not in feet , there are 2,500 blocks of wood in the floor , and strips of easy-clean slate in front of the coal-fired kitchen range . 

  The two recesses on either side of the two-oven range contain a hot plate and a separate pastry oven . 

  There is an excellent stock of frying , preserving and baking pans , gold jelly moulds and cake tins , and tinned copper saucepans in five different sizes . 

  Among the most beautifully turned pieces of furniture in the house are the wheelbacked Windsor kitchen chairs , made from yew . 

  The oak refectory table with a drawer at each end is a copy of the dining room table Lutyens designed for his first married home . 

  The Chinese lavender jar on the far right of the picture bears out Agnes Jekyll's excellent suggestion in her Dolls' House cookery book , that to " sweeten the atmosphere before guests assemble and after savoury dishes have been prepared " , the dried heads of lavender should be placed on a heated shovel and judiciously waved about ! 

  Too small to see in the photograph are three ivory mice in the mouse-trap that was an inevitable part of kitchen equipment of the period . 

  The kitchen lobby or service area , with entrances to both the pantry and dining room , has two tables ( wooden to stop the trays sliding ) , a hot plate and , like the scullery , a Minimax fire extinguisher . 

  Copper kettles . 

  The copper pans are correctly tinned inside . 

  The Twining Model Co. was responsible for making the mincer , the weighing machine and the coffee grinder on the table . 

  Doulton kitchen and nursery china marked with their respective letters . 

  The monogrammed key-patterned service for six people was made by the Cauldon Potteries . 

  The mechanism of the Ewbank carpet sweeper is identical to today's model . 

  The perfectly equipped scullery , with lead-lined sinks and hot and cold water . 

  A slate floor ensures easy cleaning . 

  The butler had to go to the housekeeper for articles of scullery , kitchen and downstairs linen . 

  The open door leads into the kitchen . 

  Commissioned by Thomas Goode &amp;amp; Co . 

  Ltd. , Doulton also made and donated the best royal dinner service with a plain gold rim for 18 people , complete with 22 serving and covered vegetable dishes . 

  Two plates from the china cupboards are shown here on a plate from a private dinner service of Queen Elizabeth II . 

  Opposite : The butler's pantry , with plenty of room for storing the glass and five best china services . 

  The silver is stored in the strong room . 

  A bed tray is laid with the Cauldon Potteries breakfast service . 

  The Dining Room and Strong Room 

  " Very merry , and the best fritters that ever I eat in my life . " 

  Samuel Pepys , 1633-1703 

  With a staff entrance from the kitchen service lobby and another from the entrance hall , the dining room faces east , overlooking the garden . 

  The room is at its best looked at as a whole . 

  The carpet , painted to simulate Aubusson , reflects the pattern of the early Palladian ceiling with its merry spirits encircling the earth . 

  It is also an excellent example of how modern and antique design and furnishing would have been blended in such a house . 

  The copy of the eighteenth-century walnut table in the centre measures 5 inches when it is closed , and with twentieth-century construction extends to twenty inches . 

  The eighteen " period " walnut arm chairs are three inches high . 

  Lutyens designed the screen made by Cartier Ltd. to hide the carrying of dishes from the service area to the table . 

  The paintings over the doors are trompe-l'oeil and the painted walls carry carved swags of limewood . 

  The pictures are a typical mixture and include portraits of the kings Edward III and James V of Scotland . 

  Under McEvoy's painting after Winterhalter of Queen Victoria and her family ( the original hangs at Buckingham Palace ) , are two small pictures of corners of the Audience Chamber and Van Dyck Room at Windsor Castle , specially chosen as suitable subjects by Queen Mary and the artist , W. Ranken . 

  Copies donated by Alfred Munnings of three of his pictures are the King's charger " Delhi " , a Friesian bull and an equestrian portrait of King Edward VIII as Prince of Wales which later hung in the Paris apartment of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor . 

  The absence of visible picture chains and wires throughout the house is typical of 1920S decoration . 

  The gold plate and the silver , both in use and on display , would have been fetched by the butler from the strong room on the lower mezzanine floor , reached by the back staircase leading off the service area . 

  Here , apart from the humorous touch of the Crown Jewels , there is adequate space to house the 2,518 pieces of the silver gadroon , thread and shell pattern dinner service for eighteen people . 

  Made by Garrard &amp;amp; Co . 

  Ltd. , Crown jewellers since 1,843 , this , including an eight-piece Abercorn kettle and tea set on a silver tray , was ordered by Lutyens and its cost of 280 was paid in cash by Sir Herbert Morgan . 

  Also on the shelves is a pair of antique silver candlesticks bored for conversion to electricity . 

  The still-life oil painting is by W. B. E. Ranken . 

  The ceiling was painted by Professor Gerald Moira . 

  Webb's Crystal Glass Co. manufactured the table glass for Thomas Goode &amp;amp; Co . 

  Ltd . 

  This was donated by Mr Minton Goode , grandfather of today's chairman . 

  The place setting is laid with the silver dinner service made by Garrard . 

  Princess Marie Louise borrowed a linen tablecloth from Buckingham Palace , insured it for 100 and sent it to Belfast to be copied exactly to scale ( 22 inches ) . 

  It is one of eight in the Dolls' House , all worked with royal cyphers and the great orders of chivalry . 

  Price's candles to fill the candelabra are kept with the dry stores in the cellars . 

  Behind the steel grille and doors , flawless stones have been used in the regalia . 

  The " ermine " on the crowns is painted in enamel . 

  The Upper Hall 

  Leaving the ground floor , the marble staircase rises to the two main bedroom suites and the saloon on the first floor . 

  Behind the wrought-iron balustrade designed by Lutyens in the style of Louis XIV , the landing's marble floor is a variation of the geometrical pattern of the one in the hall below . 

  The architect asked one of his closest friends , the painter William Nicholson , to decorate the classic proportions and deeply coved ceiling of the upper hall . 

  Nicholson complied with an expansive mural of Adam and Eve being forcibly ejected from Eden by a thunderbolt , watched , as he put it , " by their pets " ! 

  Painted straight onto the walls , this commission took far more of the artist's time than he had bargained for , and Lutyens had to be firm with his friend to make him finish it . 

  In the circular niches are busts of Earls Haig and Beatty by the sculptor C. S. Jagger , with Sir William Goscombe John's busts of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra , on marble plinths , under the side arches to the lobbies . 

  Field Marshal Lord Haig ( 1861-1928 ) . 

  British Commander-in-Chief in France and Flanders during the First World War . 

  Created Earl in 1919 . 

  The King's Suite 

  " Where the quiet-coloured end of evening smiles . " 

  Robert Browning , 1812-1889 

  From the upper hall , the King's suite of wardrobe , bedroom and bathroom is reached through the right-hand lobby and faces west above the library . 

  To the right , his wardrobe is lined with fitted cupboards on both sides and a field marshal's sword made by Wilkinson Sword Ltd. lies on the lacquer table . 

  On the groined ceiling the artist W. G. de Glehn's scantily-clad maidens are at their toilette . 

  The centre light fitting , designed by Lutyens , is made of mother of pearl and ivory and matches a similar one in the private bathroom . 

  On the bedroom side the wooden carved overdoor in the early Palladian style is the most handsome in the house . 

  The King's bedroom is dominated by the eighteenth-century state bed . 

  This costly production , with the royal coat of arms embroidered in silk on white damask at the head of the bed , was manufactured and appropriately hung and plumed by the Royal School of Needlework and was donated by the school's founder , Princess Christian , mother of Princess Marie Louise . 

  Above the chimney piece and marble hearth is Ambrose McEvoy's portrait of the Princess Royal , King George V's daughter . 

  The silver chandelier is a copy of one at Knole , home of the Sackville-West family , and the tapestry fire screen is worked with the traditional vase of flowers on a marble pedestal that was the badge of the weavers of the royal wardrobe in the eighteenth century . 

  The furniture is of walnut , with comfortable chairs in red damask . 

  Scattered around are favourite books , photographs and one of Dunhill's pipes . 

  On the left , adjoining the bedroom , marble is a prominent feature of the King's bathroom . 

  Green verdite has been used below the dado rail and for the matching tops of the dressing table and washstand . 

  The handsome verdite bath with six silver taps stands on a marble floor . 

  The dressing table set is made of ivory and there are bottles of hair wash and rose water . 

  Laurence Irving painted a ceiling of teasing satyrs and zodiac signs , and the pictures are Punch cartoons in red lacquer and gilt frames . 

  The royal coat of arms embroidered in silk on the white damask under the tester of the King's bed . 

  It measures 3 5/ 8 inches in height and width . 

  George Plank painted the centre of the ceiling with the first lines of the National Anthem . 

  The dressing-table mirror is made from walnut . 

  George Plank also painted the wall panels . 

  Most of the beds in the house are made up with pillows , bolsters , sheets and blankets . 

  The thorough attention to detail , seen in the dovetailing of the drawers and the upholstery of the chairs , is evidence of the superb craftsmanship throughout the house . 

  The carved over-door between the King's bedroom and wardrobe . 

  The King's wardrobe . 

  The " King's pattern " shooting stick . 

  Part of Athol Purdey's gift . 

  Favourite walking and shooting sticks by the connecting bedroom door . 

  Brigg Umbrellas made the walking sticks which are 3 inches high . 

  The King's bathroom . 

  The tooth and nail brushes throughout the house were manufactured by the firm of Addis . 

  Their bristles were made from the finest hair available , taken from inside the ear of a goat . 

  The ivory toothbrush is 3/ 4 of an inch long . 

  On one embarrassing occasion Queen Mary caught her earring on the beard of the plumber who was showing her that the lavatory cistern really worked . 

  The Queen's Suite , the Trunk Room and Back Staircase 

  " For every marriage then is best in tune , 

  when that the wife is May , the husband June . " 

  Rowland Watkyns , fl.1662 

  The Queen's suite fills the second floor on the south side . 

  Her bedroom is above the kitchen , with connecting doors that lead to her bathroom on the right and her wardrobe on the left . 

  Like the King's bedroom , the high ceiling of the main room supports a mezzanine floor on each side above the bathroom and wardrobe . 

  Both these main suites show the combination of ease and comfort which was beginning to be considered essential to the perfect home of the Twenties . 

  The Queen's bedroom with its walls and bed hung in blue-grey damask is a Twenties pastiche , with furniture that ranges from the Lutyens-designed " Queen Anne " bed , to the modern painted cabinet used as a bedside table with its reading light . 

  The problem of hanging such a stiff fabric as damask on the state beds was overcome by carving the hangings out of wood , and sticking the fabric curtains onto the carved folds . 

  The Queen's bedcover is of blue silk and quilted with seed pearls . 

  The portrait over the marble and jade chimney piece is of the Queen's mother , the Duchess of Teck , painted by F. O. Salisbury , and the only other picture in the room is a portrait of Mary Queen of Scots by Gerald Kelly . 

  Two elaborate pieces of furniture are the cream and gilt lacquer cabinet in the style of James II on the right of the fireplace which opens to show five drawers with individual working locks , and the large Victorian wardrobe veneered in amboyna wood , partly fitted with sliding shelves . 

  Letter-writing and diary-keeping filled an important amount of a lady's time , and a well laid-out desk was a useful piece of bedroom furniture . 

  Glyn Philpot painted the ceiling which has a centre of perished mirror work . 

  The carpet was specially woven by the Stratford on Avon School of Weaving and measures 13 by 16 inches . 

  Over the doors leading to the bathroom and wardrobe are a matching clock and barometer . 

  On the right , the bathroom ( eight inches wide ) is a room of pure fantasy , with shagreen ( houndsfish skin ) walls supported by columns and arches of ivory . 

  On a floor tiled in mother-of-pearl , the alabaster bath and hand basin designed by the architect have silver taps while , inset behind the bath , the water closet is enclosed in a carved chair . 

  In the wardrobe , the ceiling painted on wood in oils by Professor R. Anning Bell is a masterpiece of fun , combining the five bodily senses with the four winds and the four seasons . 

  On the upper mezzanine floor , and close to the staff lift that serves both the back of the Queen's bathroom and the King's wardrobe , a spare room has been turned into a trunk room . 

  The quality of luggage was of great importance , and it was usually made of good leather . 

  As there were always numerous staff and porters available , it did not matter that it was extremely heavy to carry even when empty . 

  Because of the time it took to travel , clothes had to stay packed for long periods , and the number of changes needed throughout the day and evening necessitated quantities of clothes which were packed in different shaped dressing cases , boot boxes , hat boxes , umbrella cases , trunks and suitcases . 

  The cypher worked in silk on the canopy behind Queen Mary's bedhead 

  The Queen's dressing table set of blue enamel . 

  It includes a pot of cold cream , the only make-up indulged in then by many ladies of the Queen's age . 

  The mirror is framed with real diamonds . 

  The " silk " curtains of the dressing table are painted onto carved wood . 

  Lutyens designed and Cartier made the clock of gold and blue enamel that stands on the chimney piece . 

  The best beds had a mattress of horsehair laid on top of a box-sprung mattress , the equivalent of today's interior-sprung mattress . 

  The rubber hot-water bottle was a very modern idea at the time the house was built . 

  The Queen's bathroom . 

  The floor made from mother of pearl is just 8 inches wide . 

  The ceiling of the Queen's bathroom , set in ivory and painted by Maurice Greiffenhagen . 

  The Queen's bathroom . 

  The floor made from mother of pearl is just 8 inches wide . 

  Toilet requisites by J. &amp;amp; E. Atkinson Ltd . 

  The Queen's wardrobe , showing the back staircase . 

  The seasons and winds painted on the Queen's wardrobe ceiling by Professor R. Anning Bell . 

  The jewel safe made by Chubb &amp;amp; Sons Lock &amp;amp; Safe Co . 

  Ltd . 

  By permission of the Queen and with the consent of the Cauldon Potteries Ltd. , Sir George Hayter Chubb had painted metal replicas of the house made , with a lock and key and a slit in the roof to be used as children's money boxes . 

  The Queen was particularly delighted with these models and asked for two dozen to be sent to Buckingham Palace . 

  Made by Brigg Umbrellas , with a handle matching one of the Brigg walking sticks in the King's wardrobe . 

  The banister of the back staircase has the same pattern as the glazing bars of a glass-fronted cabinet Lutyens designed for his own house . 

  The trunk room . 

  The plain mantelpiece shows that this was an unimportant room . 

  The door on the left leads to a staff bedroom , and the glazed doors to the lift lobby . 

  The Saloon 

  " Curtsey while you're thinking what to say . 

  It saves time . " 

  Lewis Carroll , 1832-1898 

  The saloon , or drawing room , extends the full width of the first floor on the east side above the dining room . 

  Used for formal entertaining , it is the largest room in the house . 

  With no concession to comfort and the two thrones under a silk canopy , the room suggests that in this part of the house at least Lutyens was designing a miniature royal palace . 

  Indeed , by this time he was so immersed in the project that , as his close companion of the time , Lady Sackville , pointed out , he was not paying nearly enough attention to either her , or his work on Britannic House for the Anglo Iranian Oil Co . 

  Ltd ! 

  The six state portraits are charmingly painted . 

  On either side of the thrones the pictures of George III ( 1760-1820 ) and Queen Charlotte are by Harrington Mann , copied from the original paintings by Reynolds that now hang in the Royal Academy . 

  At the opposite end Edward VII ( 1901-1910 ) and Queen Alexandra by Sir John Lavery are based on the state portraits by Fildes at Buckingham Palace . 

  After some initial doubt , Sir William Orpen , a future president of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters , agreed to adapt his usual free style to paint his first royal portraits , those of the King and Queen . 

  Lady Patricia Ramsay , a cousin of the King , painted the panels over the doors . 

  The specially woven damask material is in the same eighteenth-century style as that in the Queen's bedroom , and hangs between the marble cornice and dado . 

  The glass vitrines are filled with small ornaments , and the two console tables have elephant-tooth tops . 

  The music for the piano is a selection from some fifty volumes of published music in the library , the work of twenty-five contemporary composers , which has been photographically reduced to scale . 

  The door behind the piano leads onto the landing of the upper hall , completing the tour of the first floor . 

  In the main rooms every fireplace is fully equipped with fireback , dogs and fire irons . 

  These irons are of silver with the Queen's crown and cypher . 

  The marble chimney piece of the saloon . 

  Above , a portrait of the Electress Sophia of Hanover , mother of George I and ancestress of the House of Windsor , by A. S. Cope . 

  " The Children of Rumour with her Hundred Tongues " , by Charles Sims , on the ceiling . 

  The dragon that creeps around the bottom left-hand panel warns agile tongues against unguarded gossip . 

  The inlaid marble top of the gilt table in the centre of the saloon . 

  This piece of furniture is one of the very few genuine antique pieces in the house , and could well have been an eighteenth-century travelling craftsman's miniature . 

  The lacquer cabinet has a black and gold exterior and was copied from an existing one at Londonderry House . 

  It measures 42 inches by 42 inches in height and width . 

  The gilded stand is 22 inches high . 

  Presented by the Marchioness of Londonderry . 

  The copies of eighteenth-century chairs and sofas are not quite 3 inches high . 

  The hand-worked upholstery is in imitation of Aubusson tapestry . 

  The landscapes behind are by Adrian Stokes . 

  The grand piano was designed by Lutyens and made by John Broadwood &amp;amp; Sons Ltd . 

  The firm is one of the oldest holders of a royal warrant in existence , and was appointed pianoforte manufacturer to King George II . 

  William Orpen's state portrait of Queen Mary is 10 inches high in its frame . 

  The Mezzanine Floors and Staff Bedrooms 

  Staff rooms on the lower and upper mezzanine floors can only be reached by the back staircase or the service lift . 

  The supply of domestic staff in Britain had dwindled after the First World War , when former servants found better paid employment for fewer hours' work in offices and factories . 

  Although in many cases modern technology had reduced the necessity for large staffs , households were conscious of the need to accommodate their remaining servants in well-appointed rooms , with better facilities and labour-saving devices . 

  Distributed on the two mezzanine floors are six servants' rooms , which include the menservants' bathroom with a water closet and the butler's bedroom . 

  The maids' bathroom and water closet is on the top floor by the linen room . 

  The firm of Waring &amp;amp; Gillow was responsible for contemporary furniture in many large houses , and supplied the Dolls' House with typical , practical pieces for staff bedrooms . 

  The butler's bed of unstained holly wood . 

  The more important members of the staff had wooden beds and horsehair mattresses . 

  Plain hospital beds with flock mattresses laid on interlaced wire springs were for the junior members of the staff . 

  A maid's room on the upper mezzanine floor north side . 

  A maid's dressing table with her sewing basket . 

  There is a trouser press in every manservant's room . 

  Washstand in a manservant's room . 

  The picture by Lucy Kemp-Welch is " Bringing up the Guns " . 

  The clothes baskets in the bedrooms have attached lids . 

  The inevitable washstand set of china found in every staff bedroom . 

  This is in the butler's room on the lower mezzanine floor and was made by the Cauldon Potteries , established in 1774 . 

  The Princess Royal's Room 

  " And still she slept an azure-lidded sleep in blanched linen , smooth , and lavender'd . " 

  John Keats , 1795-1821 

  The top floor of the house with its two bathrooms , four lobbies and six rooms is the most difficult floor for today's visitor to see clearly . 

  Its many rooms , all ten inches high , are filled with the memorabilia of childhood and family life , and the housekeeper's bed-sitting room and the linen room are also there . 

  The passenger lift stops outside the north-facing lobby to the Princess Royal's ( or the eldest daughter's ) bedroom . 

  The room , which looks west over the garage far below , is filled with cream-painted and decorated furniture that matches the hanging cupboard in the lobby . 

  The bed is a copy of one of a pair that Lutyens designed for his own eldest daughters . 

  Time has disintegrated the pea organically grown to the correct proportion that , true to fairy-tale tradition , he placed under the mattress ! 

  The looking-glass and candlesticks are made of ivory . 

  There are twelve pictures of the " Cries of London " in the room . 

  The Princess Royal's bed is known as a St Ursula bed . 

  The design was inspired by the Carpaccio picture of " The Dream of St Ursula " in the Accademia , Venice . 

  It is 7 inches high to the top of the frame . 

  The Queen's Sitting Room 

  " In the midst of this huge model of an Empire on which the sun never sets , the centre of public attention is this little house which the flame of a single candle could gut in five minutes . " 

  From the preface of the original illustrated catalogue of the Dolls' House at the Empire Exhibition 

  Placed as it is between the Princess Royal's room and the night nursery , this very personal room contains nothing that is not essential to the character of its occupant . 

  A piece of the Queen's unfinished embroidery lies on one of the chairs . 

  The glass cabinets are filled with a collection of jade and amber ; amongst the tiny animals are a water buffalo , a goat and a lion . 

  Queen Mary enjoyed the oriental decoration and the vogue for cream furniture that were fashionable in the Twenties . 

  Edmund Dulac painted ochre silk walls with golden clouds and water lilies . 

  The rug is a copy of a Chinese carpet of the Chien Lung period and is hand worked with 324 knots to the inch . 

  The silver Winsor &amp;amp; Newton watercolour paint box on the Queen's desk , photographed alongside a full-size brush . 

  The Night Nursery , Nursery Bathroom and Medicine Cabinet 

  " Nanny was boss -- she was marvellous . " 

  Mary Lutyens to the author 

  In all households with a nursery , " nanny " was a very important person . 

  Neither staff nor mistress , nevertheless her word was law , and in most cases her responsibility total . 

  The nanny who arrived in the Lutyens's household in 1898 , for example , was still with the family when she died 38 years later , and the nanny's rather grand bed in the Dolls' House night nursery can only be interpreted as a mark of the greatest respect . 

  It was usual for the baby of the family to sleep with the nanny , and the Dolls' House night nursery has everything necessary for both of them . 

  Adjacent to this room , the well-appointed bathroom is for nursery use only . 

  Leaving the bathroom , the immediate lobby on the south side of the top floor is fitted with a pair of walnut wall cabinets . 

  Unglazed and firmly closed against small fingers , these are the medicine cabinets containing invalid food , " Torch " brand hydrogen , Allenbury's vaseline , swabs , bandages and splints . 

  Three padded pneumonia jackets , worn to combat the crisis of this dreaded disease , point to the revolution in treatment brought about since the arrival of penicillin and antibiotics . 

  The nursery rooms have everything necessary for the baby of the day . 

  The feeding bottle is one inch long . 

  The cradle was especially designed for the house . 

  Made of ivory and applewood with the Prince of Wales's feathers on the hood , it cost 30 , and was donated by a Mr F. A . 

  Koenig , a Silesian banker for whom Lutyens was doing some work . 

  The bath is made of silver . 

  Normally kept in the chest of drawers behind the bed , the lace christening robe and petticoat embroidered with pearls is laid out on nanny's bedcover . 

  The layette also consists of three nightdresses , three vests , three petticoats and two day dresses . 

  The silver guardian angel at the foot of the cradle . 

  " Bubbles " by Alfred Heming after Millais . 

  The nursery bathroom . 

  One of a pair of walnut medicine cupboards in the lobby between the bathroom and day nursery . 

  One of the three pneumonia jackets in the nursery . 

  The Day Nursery and Nursery Lobby 

  Where once we dwelt our name is heard no more , 

  Children not thine have trod my nursery floor : " 

  William Cowper , 1731-1800 

  Flanked on each side by useful lobbies that give easy access to both lifts and the back stairs , the day nursery is the largest room on the south front . 

  For the children , everything of interest happened here . 

  Ruled over by nanny , they had their meals ( sent up on the special china from the kitchen ) , played , fought and started early lessons in counting , music and the alphabet . 

  Small children were still very much " seen and not heard " , and so were not usually produced downstairs until after nursery tea ; then , ultra-clean and uncomfortable visits to the grown-ups took place in rooms which bore no resemblance to their cosy everyday nursery world . 

  The Dolls' House nursery is filled with everything considered essential for this world , and is an excellent reminder of the way in which privileged children grew up between the wars . 

  Edmund Dulac's illustrations of fairy-tales are painted onto the papered walls , and will keep even today's adults arguing the visible score of either eleven or thirteen stories ! 

  One of the most charming and intricately made toys is the toy theatre . 

  The curtain in it rises on two adjustable scenes from Peter Pan -- the nursery set with the window wide open and Nanna's kennel , and the underground tree house . 

  That Peter Pan was chosen is no coincidence , for James Barrie was a life-long friend of Lutyens , who in turn designed the original night nursery set for the first production of Peter Pan in 1904 . 

  Lutyens's family were brought up to believe that it was their father who invented Nanna , and that it was from their own night nursery window in Bloomsbury Square that Wendy and the boys flew with Peter Pan to the Neverland . 

  A comfortable chair for nanny stands by the brass-bound fender that surrounds the hob grate , with the nursery kettle on it for making the baby's feeds . 

  Jars of boiled sweets , rusks , biscuit tins and chocolate boxes are on view . 

  Their contents would have been eaten under strict supervision ! 

  The toy train that draws into Windsor station is four inches long . 

  The fully strung , Broadwood cottage piano has a book of nursery rhymes on it . 

  By the right-hand door is a very early wireless set . 

  The toy cupboards are filled with soft animals , books and amusements , and animals walk two by two into Noah's Ark . 

  Whether or not the parrot is a stuffed or talking model is left to our own imagination . 

  The glazed corner cupboards in the left-hand lobby hold a pale blue Wedgwood breakfast service , and teatime jams and biscuits . 

  The toy theatre has two adjustable painted backcloths from the story of Peter Pan . 

  The hobby horse is 2 inches long . 

  A solid , drop-leafed , gate-legged nursery table . 

  5 inches high , the gramophone can be fully wound . 

  Seventy people were employed in the various stages of the manufacture of the miniature . 

  The record on it is the National Anthem . 

  Other records include " Rule Britannia " and " Home Sweet Home " . 

  A selection of Pomona toys , considered extremely fashionable in the Twenties . 

  The breakfast set in the nursery lobby left-hand cupboard was donated by Miss Henrietta Wedgwood . 

  The provisions show familiar names , with biscuits from Huntley &amp;amp; Palmer and McVitie &amp;amp; Price and pots of Tiptree jams . 

  The Linen Room , Housekeeper's Room and Housemaids' Closet 

  " Quarterly or half-yearly , it is a good plan for the housekeeper to make an inventory of everything she has under her care , and compare this with the lists of a former period . " 

  Mrs Beeton's Household Management , 1861 

  The linen room is the largest in the centre of the east side top floor . 

  To the right is the maids' bathroom , and on the left the housekeeper's bed-sitting room . 

  Throughout the house there is monogrammed kitchen linen , table-cloths , bathroom towels , sheets , pillowcases and all the usual items required in any house . 

  All this is stored and cared for in the six large unheated cupboards in the linen room . 

  Although by today's standards the amount seems excessive , linen given to a bride on marriage was meant to last a lifetime . 

  One of the reasons why items well over 150 years old can still be found in many houses today is that to look after linen properly it was " rested " between laundering and use . 

  Frequent washing weakened the fibres , so items taken in strict rotation made it necessary to keep a well-stocked cupboard . 

  There were commercial laundries in the 1920s and the large linen hampers that took two people to carry them to the laundry van show that this was a luxury enjoyed by the inhabitants of the Dolls' House . 

  The Windsor chairs have the Prince of Wales's feathers on the back , and the picture is by Lady Patricia Ramsay . 

  The room next door is the housekeeper's own room , furnished with one of the better beds , a comfortable chair and pretty china . 

  Before leaving the top floor by the back stairs , or one or other of the lifts , it is important to look into the north-facing housemaids' closet . 

  This is an efficiently laid-out room , with its two sinks and teak draining board . 

  Although modern appliances such as the electric Hoover were functional and popular , housemaids were still expected to be downstairs between five and six a. m. to sweep the rooms and fireplaces , and polish grates and furniture . 

  In the 1920s there was no running water in bedrooms , and copper hot-water cans and jugs were used for filling and placing night and morning in the bedrooms for washing . 

  Linen was tied in different coloured ribbon to denote whether it was for nursery , staff or kitchen . 

  An electric iron was a modern invention when the house was built . 

  The housekeeper was in charge of mending and looking after all the linen from the various parts of the house . 

  The treadle sewing machine . 

  The housekeeper's room . 

  The housemaids' closet . 

  Polishing and scouring materials are similar to those in use today . 

  Dutch tiles were a great favourite of Lutyens , and typical of the era . 

  These are hand-painted and fired replicas of existing patterns . 

  The Lifts 

  When the house was built , it was the first dolls' house to have both passenger and service lifts . 

  These were specially designed and manufactured by the firm of Waygood Otis Ltd , a company still involved with lift mechanism all over the world today . 

  Both cars are supported in proper metal slings , and while a safety gear is provided under each , this is not connected up for operation owing to the small size of the model . 

  The machine for operating the lifts is mounted in a chamber in the roof of the house . 

  The suspension ropes , of which there are four to each car , were made of good fishing line , as this was found to give the best results . 

  The passenger lift , first entered from the right-hand lobby in the ground floor hall , serves the three main floors , and is controlled by a fully automatic set of push buttons at each floor so that the car can be called or dispatched from any of the main floors . 

  The goods or service lift is entered from the backstairs area behind the passenger lift and is controlled by a set of three " semi-automatic " push buttons , the third being for stopping the lift at any desired point . 

  The only concession to scale is that for obvious reasons the lift buttons are situated outside the cars ! 

  The passenger car of polished mahogany is 4 inches wide by 55:8 inches deep and 7 inches high . 

  The floor is alternate strips of oak and walnut . 

  The service car , made from light polished oak , has no seat and is only 3 inches deep . 

  The Cellars 

  There are five reasons we should drink ; 

  Good wine -- a friend -- or being dry 

  -- or lest we should be by and by -- 

  or any other reason why . 

  Henry Aldrich , 1648-1710 

  Reached by a flight of back stairs , the south-facing basement is a large cellar with a groined roof . 

  This is divided into nine bays . 

  The first half is used for the traditional binning of the wines selected for the house , and the second half for the storage of dry , tinned and bottled goods . 

  The quality of the wine selected for storage in the Dolls' House cellar was planned with great care and knowledge . 

  The task was undertaken by Francis Berry , then joint senior partner of Berry Bros. &amp;amp; Co. of 3 , St James's Street , London , and grandfather of today's managing director of Berry Bros. &amp;amp; Rudd Ltd . 

  Although Francis Berry's involvement with the cellar came purely from his friendship with Lutyens , this must not be taken as favouritism Berry's was one of the oldest wine merchants in the business ( the company started trading in 1699 ) , and their first royal warrant was given to them by Edward VII , an honour the firm holds to this day . 

  No. 3 , St James's Street has been the company premises since it was rebuilt in the early eighteenth century and the name Berry Bros. &amp;amp; Rudd Ltd. , as it is now known , was established in 1943 . 

  It is interesting for today's connoisseur to look at the cellar list of the Dolls' House and ruminate on the joys of opening a bottle or two . 

  Anthony Berry , son of Francis , says , " There is nothing that I would not enjoy drinking today . " 

  It should be realised that the amount stocked would only have been expected to last a relatively short time . 

  In the 1920s the owners of large private cellars did not , with the possible exception of vintage port , lay down wine for future consumption as they do now . 

  The lack of inflation between the wars allowed merchants to hold large stocks that were ready for drinking within two years , and weekly deliveries by Berry Bros. to the cellars of the aristocracy and English gentlemen could be up to thirty dozen or more bottles for immediate use . 

  Today's modern tendency to place large orders in anticipation of escalating prices has resulted in the owners of cellarless houses being obliged , more often than not , to store their orders with the wine merchants themselves . 

  After the wine for the day had been chosen by the master of the house , the butler was responsible for its presentation at table . 

  All red wine and vintage port would have been decanted ; port as early as possible on the day it was to be drunk ; claret two or three hours before drinking and kept at room temperature without a stopper in order to let it " breathe " . 

  Before the days of stainless steel , large houses used a knife-cleaning machine . 

  Emery powder poured into the machine cleaned the knives , inserted blade down into the sockets . 

  Cleaning the inner brushes of the machine was a time-consuming affair if grease was left on the knives . 

  In the Dolls' House cellar there is such a machine made by Kent . 

  The corks were tight enough to keep the wine in good condition for perhaps forty to fifty years , but it is understandable that after sixty years some evaporation should have taken place . 

  The ice safe kept in the cellar was a forerunner of today's refrigerator . 

  The tiled side was used for hanging joints of meat . 

  The zinc-lined drawers held lumps of ice delivered weekly by the fishmonger . 

  The knife cleaner and a selection from the dry stores . 

  A careful note of every bottle used was entered by the butler in the cellar book , which was a complete record of the contents of the cellar . 

  Vintage port in the Twenties had no labels . 

  White splashes of paint on the bottles indicated which way up they should be binned after delivery from the wine merchant . 

  All the bottles were hand blown to scale by the Whitefriars Glass Co . 

  Authentic printed labels were correctly reproduced by photography and the bottles filled with the corresponding vintages . 

  Filling the bottles proved to be the most difficult job of all . 

  The wine was introduced into them by means of fine glass pipettes , though the champagne had to be robbed of its sparkle before it could be persuaded to enter ! 

  Not mentioned among the list of stores , but found in cupboards throughout the house , are quantities of Colman's mustard , Lea &amp;amp; Perrins Worcester sauce , Shippam's paste , Jackson's vinegar , as well as toilet soaps from Pears and Atkinson . 

  Candlesticks were an important part of cellar equipment . 

  Wine was decanted against the flame of a candle , and pouring would be stopped as soon as the wine started to get cloudy or showed the first signs of deposit . 

  Today it is usually decanted against an electric light or white background . 

  Bass beer was excellent staff refreshment . 

  The Garage 

  " The poetry of motion ! 

  The real way to travel ! 

  The only way to travel ! " 

  Kenneth Grahame , 1859-1932 

  When the house was first exhibited at the Wembley Exhibition the six cars in the garage occasioned much comment . 

  Although cheaper cars were just beginning to appear , owning a motor car was still the prerogative of the rich . 

  The Twenties were golden years of motoring design . 

  The horseless carriages of the first decade had made way for vehicles designed as motor cars in their own right . 

  The great British car manufacturing companies , among them Daimler , Lanchester , Rolls-Royce , Sunbeam and Vauxhall , all of which are represented in the Dolls' House , made their own engines and chassis with a standard body , but it was more usual for the owners of such cars to have special bodywork built to their own requirements by coachbuilders . 

  All the firms invited to donate the custom-built models in the Dolls' House took the opportunity to use the black and maroon colours of the royal livery on their bodywork . 

  From 1900 until 1943 the official royal motor cars were made by Daimler , a tradition instituted by Edward VII . 

  Today the Queen's official cars are made by Rolls-Royce . 

  The garage itself is built into a drawer in the western basement . 

  When the drawer is pulled out , it brings the hidden columns supporting the five car bays level with the front base of the house . 

  The front flap of the drawer drops down to a fixed horizontal position to complete an outside yard , stencilled to represent red brick . 

  A bicycle was a prized possession , and repaid the care spent on it in perfect working order . 

  A full-sized Rudge motor-cycle and sidecar cost 95 between 1920 and 1924 . 

  The 1923 40/ 50 HP Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost seven-seater limousine-landaulet , with tyres donated by the Dunlop Rubber Co . 

  Ltd. and the bodywork painted by F. W. Hooper of Hooper &amp;amp; Co . 

  Ltd . 

  The model weighs 4 lbs whereas the full-scale version weighed 5,200 lbs . 

  The 14/ 40 HP five-seater Vauxhall . 

  The radiator badge was made by W. O . 

  Lewis ( Badges ) Ltd . 

  The 1922 four-seater 20/ 60 HP Sunbeam open tourer . 

  This car has brakes on the front wheels as well as the back so that it can be slowed down safely from very high speeds . 

  The weight of the model is 3lbs 14 ozs as against the 3,700 lbs of the original . 

  The replica of the 40 HP 1922-3 Lanchester limousine is 14 inches long . 

  It was made by the Twining Model Co. with wheels by the Rudge-Whitworth Co. and tyres by the Dunlop Rubber Co . 

  Ltd . 

  The Daimler limousine motor car with coachwork by Barker &amp;amp; Co . 

  Ltd . 

  The Daimler station bus made by the Twining Model Co . 

  Ltd . 

  The King's cypher on the left-hand door of the Vauxhall . 

  The royal coat of arms on the Daimler station bus . 

  Queen Mary's cypher on the door of the Daimler limousine . 

  The Vauxhall wire wheel based on a Rudge-Whitworth patent . 

  Only Rolls-Royce had their own design . 

  Silver-topped flasks conveniently placed inside the rear door of the Rolls-Royce . 

  Lanchester built the first petrol-engined car in Britain . 

  Queen Mary's son , the Duke of York ( later King George VI ) , had several in succession for his personal use . 

  The company was taken over by Daimler in the late Twenties . 

  A Bowser portable tank and pump for pumping petrol either into or out of a car . 

  The Daimler station bus with a shooting brake body , also used for the staff and luggage . 

  This is the largest car in the garage , and is I 8 inches long , 6 inches wide and 7 1/ 2 inches high . 

  The inspection pit and work bench . 

  It was normal for large houses to carry their own petrol pumps and fire appliances . 

  The Garden 

  " It may safely be said that all good gardening consists in putting the right plant in the right place . " 

  Gertrude Jekyll , 1922 , from her book in the Queen Mary's Dolls' House library 

  When Gertrude Jekyll and Edwin Lutyens met in the spring of 1889 , she was an eccentric spinster of forty-five , whose myopic eyesight was beginning to restrict her many talents , and in particular her outstanding work in garden design . 

  Twenty years her junior , the young Lutyens had always nurtured the idea that the garden of a house should complement the whole picture . 

  The meeting of their two minds produced a working partnership of mutual enjoyment : he became her eyes and long-distance vision , whilst she augmented his inspiration with her knowledge of plant and vegetable life . 

  Their joint commissions reached well over a hundred , and though by the time the Dolls' House was created , Miss Jekyll was nearly eighty and practically blind , being asked to design the garden gave her immense satisfaction , and has left us with an unaltered glimpse of this period of England's gardening history . 

  The basement drawer which holds the garden with its two-foot trees , rambling roses and a magnificent pair of iron gates is less than eleven inches deep . 

  To have made the garden a permanent fixture would have made access impossible to the interior of the house on the east facade . 

  The problem of closing the drawer was solved by fixing the trees in front of the gates and balustrade , and placing an invisible hinge the breadth of the garden between the trees and the flower beds . 

  This hinge , when released , allows the front of the drawer to come up , laying the gates , balustrade and trees rigidly horizontal over the hedges and flower beds . 

  The whole drawer can then be pushed into the basement . 

  When the garden is displayed , the drawer is drawn out to its full extent , the front is let down , the trees and gates and balustrade spring into place , and with the other three sides of the drawer forming the garden walls , the complex is complete . 

  Owing to her failing eyesight , Gertrude Jekyll asked two friends , the Misses Beatrice and Helen Hindley , to make the flowers and trees . 

  It took many hours of structural trials to perfect the authentic shapes and colouring of the flowers in painted metal . 

  Each one is to scale , botanically correct , and made from studies at Kew Gardens . 

  The sisters were also responsible for the bowls of flowers which appear throughout the house . 

  The pots and containers were made from cotton reels . 

  Beds planted with summer filling of tiger lilies , carnations , sweet peas , poppies , marigolds , gentians and fuchsias . 

  No suitable material came to hand for the box hedges . 

  In the end they were made of specially manufactured rubber and painted by hand . 

  The trees screw into the base , and their trunks and leaves are made of metal , thickened with specially grown dwarf twigs . 

  Every leaf was shaped by hand . 

  One of two baby carriages each 3 inches long . 

  The garden tools are 5 inches long . 

  The Atco motor mowing machine with a removable hood is 3 inches high . 

  The heavy hand roll-mower is 1 inches wide . 

  The grass is made of green velvet . 

  Two patterns of Lutyens's garden seats made from oak . 

  The " earth " in the flower pots was roughened with sandpaper and coloured with brown shoe polish . 

  Agapanthus in pots ( far right ) was a Jekyll speciality . 

  Because the wheels of the lawn mowers are outside the cutting blades , a traditional brick " on edge " is let into the ground between the lawn and box hedge for the wheels to run on . 

  A bird sits on her eggs . 

  The House Today 

  " Houses are built to live in and not look on ; therefore let use be preferred before uniformity except where both may be had . " 

  Francis Bacon , 1561-1626 

  In the sixty odd years that have passed since it was built , the house , like any other house , has mellowed . 

  Dust has gathered in inaccessible places , walls have faded and paintwork has subtly changed colour . 

  In 1972 , the press was notified and the house closed to the public for two and a half months . 

  All the items in it were removed and given a thorough overhaul by the Restoration Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum . 

  The cars were restored by the Science Museum . 

  The electrical , mechanical and plumbing systems were renovated . 

  The plumbing and drainage pipes were all intact and in fairly good condition , but the electrical equipment and the lighting circuits were in need of urgent attention . 

  Approximately 1,100 metres of special miniature cable were used to change the wiring in the seventy light fittings from 4 volts DC to 24 volts AC lighting at 2 lumens per square foot . 

  New lighting effects were installed to improve public viewing from outside the glass case , and an operating console was designed to fit into a small room outside the Dolls' House . 

  Each room was wired on a different circuit so that the lights in it could be switched on and off at will . 

  The crystal chandelier in the Queen's bedroom was electrified with specially devised candle lamps in miniature candleholders . 

  Electric lights were installed in the lifts which were also refitted with modern motors . 

  The shell raising and lowering mechanism was overhauled and a new electric motor fitted with modern gearing and cable adjusting devices . 

  And so the house today is ready to face the future , and new generations of young and old will continue to make the special journey from all corners of the earth to see what is justifiably called the most wonderful dolls' house in the world . 

  Mr E. O. Warner of James Purdey &amp;amp; Sons Ltd. with his original entry in the firm's ledger for the guns in the Dolls' House , 65 years after writing it . 

  Born in 1896 , he joined Purdey's in 1918 and has been with them ever since . 

  Sliding sashes double hung with lines and weights . 

  Wear and tear on the paintwork of the Queen's bedroom . 

  The original , unfaded colour of the damask in the saloon is found behind a state portrait . 

  The silk hangings and many of the rugs and carpets in the house were woven by the Gainsborough Silk Weaving Co . 

  Scratches around the brass door handle and lock bear witness to use over the years . 

  Every lock in the house is in perfect working order . 

  The front and the back of the Queen's bedroom carpet . 

  Woven by crippled children from the Stratford-on-Avon School of Weaving . 

  misspellings in the following letter are part of the original text 

  Dear Reeder 

  A man called Rod asked me if wood writ sumthing at the bigning of this buk . 

  That was very nice of im becos no-one in my famlee ever ownd a book befor . 

  The onle thing we ever ownd was a hamster and he got dun in by Mr Blackadder . 

  P. T. O. 

  Mr Blackadder tolled me this buk is ful of jokes that are abowt as funny as getting your bottom caut in a bacon slicer . 

  I tolled him i thort he was rong and that the jokes are abowt as funny as some jokes that are very funny . 

  I also tolled him that I thort someone getting there bottom caut in a bacon slicer might be qite funy , in fakt . 

  So he took me to a butcher shoppe with a bacon slicer in it and you know it turned out that he was right aftr all . 

  It was not the slitest bit funny . 

  Still -- I hope you enjoi reeding the buk as much as I am going to enjoi boiling it up with some vegtables and eeting it . 

  Yours with a very sore botom , 

  Your umbel serve ant . 

  BALDRIK . 

  AT YOUR AUNTY'S 

  Visiting your Aunty is exactly the time to crack some wicked gags about the rest of the family . 

  No one else will be too pleased , but your dear old Aunty will laugh till she pops her corsets and reward you with mounds of her , ahem , " delicious " home made angel cakes . 

  Best give these to the dog . 

  Lucinda came home from her first riding lesson and told her dad that she'd had a great time . 

  " ... and after the lesson , they let me give the horse a drink . " 

  " Are not you supposed to say that you watered the horse ? " said her father . 

  " Okay , " said Lucinda , " I watered the horse . 

  Now I'd better go and milk the cat . " 

  A boy came home after his first rugby game with a broken nose , a torn ear and three loose teeth , but he could not remember who they belonged to . 

  What did Dad say when he saw Daffy Duck pushing his face through the letter box ? 

  " Oh , no ! 

  Not another bill ! " 

  RING-A-RING-A-NOSES 

  John came home from school one day with tears in his eyes . 

  " What's happened to you ? " asked his mum . 

  " The other boys keep calling me a big cissy , " sobbed John , " and hitting me ! " 

  " Then you must hit them back , " his mum advised . 

  " I cannot , " sniffed John . 

  " I might chip my nail varnish ! " 

  What's that rustling noise outside the door ? 

  Oh , it's just the paper boy . 

  A boy called round at his girlfriend's house one evening . 

  " Are we going out to eat ? " asked the girl . 

  " Well , I thought we might just eat up the road , " the boy replied . 

  " Oh , no , " said the girl , " I do not think I'd like tarmac . " 

  Here's one from Viz ... 

  HOW LONG HAVE YOU BEEN WORKING IN THIS FIELD PROFESSOR ? 

  A man came home late from work one night to find his wife sitting waiting for him in the living room . 

  " What time do you call this to be coming home ? " she yelled . 

  " Your tea is ruined so I threw it in the bin . 

  I suppose you could take me out somewhere nice for dinner , but I am not fit to be seen anywhere nice . 

  You never buy me any new clothes . 

  All I have to wear are the same old rags I've had for years . 

  I'd like to be seen in something long and flowing for once ! " 

  So he threw her in the river . 

  Wife -- Darling , I think I can hear burglars downstairs . 

  Are you awake ? 

  Husband -- Nope . 

  THE MAGNIFICENT NOSES 

  " YEEEEEUCH ! " sputtered Father as the family sat down to tea . 

  " This lettuce tastes awful . 

  Are you sure you washed it , Lucy ? " 

  " Yes , Dad , " answered his daughter , " but I could not get all the soap off ! " 

  " Did your watch stop when it hit the floor , Dad ? " asked the little boy . 

  " Of course it did ! " snapped his father . 

  " Did you think it would go straight through ? " 

  Mum came rushing into the house one evening . 

  " I've just had to walk for miles , " she said , flopping down into an armchair . 

  " I punctured two tyres on the car . " 

  " How did you manage that ? " asked Dad . 

  " I ran over a whisky bottle , " she admitted . 

  " That was daft , " said Dad . 

  " Did not you see it ? " 

  " No , " replied Mum , " the stupid old man had it in his coat pocket ! " 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  Tailors Shop Joke 

  FRANKLY , I DO N'T CARE IF YOU BUY ME OR NOT 

  THESE ARE A VERY CASUAL TROUSER SIR 

  " What happened to your grandad ? " a little boy asked his friend . 

  " I heard he'd had an accident . " 

  " He did , " replied his friend . 

  " He was in an explosion . 

  He went looking for a gas leak with a lighted match . " 

  " But he used to work for the gas board , did not he ? " said the boy . 

  " I'd have thought that looking for a gas leak with a lighted match would be the last thing he would do . " 

  " It was . " 

  Aunty Annie came to visit and stayed quite late . 

  " Maybe you should spend the night here with us , " Mum suggested . 

  " That's a good idea , " agreed Aunty Annie and started to put her coat on . 

  " Are not you going to sleep here ? " asked Mum . 

  " Yes , " said Aunty Annie , " but I am just going to pop home for my nightie ! " 

  My dad was called in to school to see the Headmaster about my little brother . 

  " What's he been up to then ? " my dad asked as he entered the Headmaster's office . 

  " Well , I do not know how to tell you this , " said the Headmaster , " but this morning we had to send your home from school for having a wee in the swimming pool . " 

  " Oh , really , " said my dad . 

  " Surely all little boys do the occasional wee in the swimming pool . " 

  " Perhaps , " replied the Headmaster , " but not from the top diving board ! ! " 

  Diana walked into the living room with her weekly pocket money stuffed into her mouth . 

  " Take that money out of your mouth ! " said her mother . 

  " It's probably covered in germs ! " 

  " I doubt it , " Diana replied . 

  " Not even a germ could live on what you give me ! " 

  ON THE WAY TO AUNTY'S HOUSE 

  Why does no one like going to Aunty's house ? 

  Because she smells , dear . 

  Maybe if I tell her one of my pooh jokes she will throw us out ! 

  Maybe you should tell her all your pooh jokes ! 

  Bite Dad really hard then maybe we will have to go home ! 

  Bed of Noses 

  A beautiful girl went into a sweet shop and asked for a box of chocolates . 

  " How much are they ? " she enquired . 

  " Since it's you , " said the young man behind the counter , " just one kiss . " 

  " Okay , " said the girl . 

  " I shall send my grandad round to pay you this afternoon ! " 

  When they were moving house , Dad got stuck on the stairs with a large wardrobe . 

  " This thing's heavier than I thought , " puffed Dad as his young son looked on . 

  " I asked Mum to help me . 

  Do you know where she is ? " 

  " Yes , " said the boy , " she's inside the wardrobe carrying all the clothes ! " 

  GRANDMA , WHY DO YOU KEEP GRANDAD UNDER THE BED ? 

  WELL , DEAR , I THINK HE'S JUST A LITTLE POTTY ! 

  A little boy had been sent off to a birthday party all dressed up in his best clothes and clutching a present for his school friend . 

  His mother was a little surprised to see him coming up the garden path crying his eyes out just half an hour later . 

  " Er ... how was the party ? " his mother asked . 

  " I could not go , " sniffed the youngster . 

  " Why not ? " asked his mum . 

  " It says on the invitation " From 3 till 6 " and I am 7 ! " 

  NOSES ! 

  GET YOUR OFFICIAL RED NOSES ! 

  A man was astounded to walk into his son's bedroom and find him sitting playing chess with his dog . 

  " That's amazing ! " said the man . 

  " I never realised our dog was so clever ! " 

  " He's not that smart , " said the boy . 

  " He's only beaten me once today . " 

  Out shopping with his mother one day , a small boy stopped at the bottom of an escalator and refused to budge . 

  " What's wrong ? " asked his mother as the boy stood staring at the moving hand rail . 

  " Nothing , " replied the boy . 

  " I am just waiting for my chewing gum to come round again . " 

  " The bin men were just about to climb into their lorry when a woman came running out of her house carrying a black bin liner . 

  " Am I too late for the rubbish ? " called the woman . 

  " No , " said the bin man , " help yourself ! " 

  It was school report time and Mandy came home with her report card . 

  " Did you get the best marks in your class this year , Mandy ? " asked her father . 

  " No , Dad , " came the reply . 

  " Did you get the best wages in your office this year ? " 

  It was well past her bedtime , but little Nichola came running into the living room where her mum and dad were sitting . 

  " Mum , can I have a glass of water , please ? " she asked . 

  " Another one , Nichola ? " said her father , frowning . 

  " Yes , " said her mother . 

  " This must be about the sixth glass of water you've asked for . " 

  " I know , " said Nichola , " but my bedroom's on fire ! " 

  A girl and her boyfriend had fallen out and he went round to her house the next evening to apologise , taking his dog with him for the walk . 

  " What are you doing with that pig ? " asked the girl . 

  " It's not a pig , it's a dog , " said the boy . 

  " I know , " replied the girl . 

  " It was the dog I was talking to ! " 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR , I'VE EATEN SOMETHING THAT DISAGREES WITH ME 

  NO YOU HAVE N'T ! 

  Granny -- I'd like a fly spray , please . 

  Shopkeeper -- I am afraid we've none left . 

  Have you tried Boots ? 

  Granny -- You must be joking ! 

  I want to spray the little devils , not kick them to death ! 

  " MUM , " SAID BRYAN , " PLASTIC BOTTLE , BREAD WRAPPER , TIN CAN , OLD RAGS , CHOP BONES , EGG CARTON . " 

  " SHUT UP , BRYAN , " SAID HIS MUM . 

  " YOU'RE JUST TALKING RUBBISH AGAIN ! " 

  Adrian was sent home from school after a school outing to the zoo with a note for his father asking poor old dad to go to see the Headmaster immediately . 

  Adrian's dad trudged off down the school and was invited in the Headmaster's office . 

  " Well , " said Adrian's dad , " what's the little rascal been up to ? " 

  " When we were at the zoo , " said the Headmaster , gravely , " Adrian was caught feeding the ducks . " 

  " So what's wrong with that ? " asked Adrian's dad . 

  " He was feeding them to the tigers ! ! " 

  JOKES NOT TO TELL AT YOUR AUNTY'S 

  Unless you want to be force-fed stale angel cakes until you weigh 73 stones , do not tell these jokes at your Aunty's . 

  Even the normally soppy old dog will turn on you , and at 73 stones , you will not be able to run all that fast . 

  The Vicar had come round to tea and was talking to Tommy and his mother about his daughter . 

  " Clara is ever so talented , " he said . 

  " She's only the same age as Tommy but I think she's already a good enough organist to start playing in church on Sundays . " 

  " Really ? " said Tommy's mother , sounding impressed . 

  " Do you have any special talents , Tommy ? " asked the Vicar . 

  " I can do animal impressions , " said Tommy . 

  " This is an elephant . " 

  " Er ... 

  I did not hear any elephant noise there , Tommy , " the Vicar confessed . 

  " Oh , I cannot do the noises , " said Tommy , " but just wait for the smell ! " 

  " Have not you washed your face yet , Sam ? " asked his mother just before Aunty arrived for tea . 

  " You will not get a kiss from your Aunty if you've got a dirty face . " 

  " Yeah , " said Sam . 

  " That's what I thought ! " 

  MUM ! 

  MUM ! 

  CAN I LICK THE BOWL ? 

  NO , DEAR , JUST FLUSH IT LIKE EVERYONE ELSE ! 

  " Mum , I am fifteen now , so can I wear lipstick and eye shadow and blusher and jewellery and high heels ? " 

  " No , Edward , you can not ! " 

  " Mum , " said the little boy , " why do you always cook breakfast in your dressing gown ? " 

  " What's wrong with that ? " asked his mother . 

  " Nothing , " said the little boy , " but it might taste better if you cooked it in the frying pan ! " 

  AT THE DOCTOR'S 

  You might think that the doctor's waiting room is just the place to crack a few gags . 

  After all , sick people need cheering up , right ? 

  WRONG ! ! 

  Being thoroughly miserable is what people like MOST about being ill ! 

  Also , if you catch the doc in a bad mood and he or she hears you taking the mickey , there are lots of particularly nasty cures which can be prescribed , such as : 

  Boil on the neck -- AMPUTATION ! 

  Wart on the elbow -- AMPUTATION ! ! 

  Runny bottom -- AMPUTATION ! ! ! 

  So beware at the doctor's . 

  In fact , be VERY ware , otherwise your Mum might end up taking all your bits home in a carrier bag ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  It's my nose ! 

  Yes , I believe noses run in your family 

  " Miss Smith , " said the doctor , " I think you've got acute appendicitis . " 

  " Ooh , " said the patient , " I am glad you like it , doctor ! " 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I've got potatoes growing out of my ears ! 

  That's incredible ! 

  You're telling me ! 

  I planted carrots ! 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR . 

  I'VE GOT A MIGRAINE NO , THAT'S JUST A " BAD HADDOCK " 

  The Scarlet Pimplenose 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR , I'VE GOT AN UPSET STOMACH ! 

  BOO ! 

  SOB ! 

  I HATE YOU ! 

  I HATE YOU ! 

  I HATE YOU ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  You've got to help me ! 

  Are not you Count Dracula ? 

  Yes , I am . 

  Well what's the problem ? 

  It's my bat breath ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I think I am a piece of toast ! 

  Hmmm ... 

  I think you need buttering up a bit . 

  A toilet rushed into the doctor's surgery . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I feel all flushed ! 

  Hmm ... must be the chain reaction ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I think I am a chocolate biscuit ! 

  Well , come a little closer , I will not bite you . 

  DOCTOR ! 

  DOCTOR ! 

  I THINK I'M MADE OF LIQUORICE ! 

  WELL , IT TAKES ALL SORTS . 

  NEW NOSES ON THE BLOCK 

  A doctor in a lunatic asylum walked past a well-known crazy who was dragging a mop behind him . 

  " Nice dog you've got there , " said the doctor , deciding to humour the man . 

  " Do not be stupid ! " replied the patient . 

  " This is not a dog , it's a mop . " 

  " Oh ... um , of course it is , " said the embarrassed doctor , hurrying off along the corridor . 

  " Ha ! " said the patient , turning to his mop . 

  " Fooled him there , did not we , Fido ? " 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I am having trouble with my breathing ! 

  I shall soon put a stop to that ! 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  ELF JOKE 

  SO LONG AS YOU'VE GOT YOUR ELF , THAT'S THE MAIN THING ! 

  A woman walked into her doctor's surgery looking very upset and wringing her hands with worry . 

  " What seems to be the trouble ? " asked the doctor . 

  " It's my son , " wailed the woman . 

  " He plays at pirates all the time , does wheelies on his bike , throws mud at his friends , kicks his football into the neighbours' garden and pings his food around at the tea table . " 

  " Well , I do not really think there's too much to worry about there , " the doctor reassured her . 

  " But I do worry , doctor , " sobbed the woman , " and so does his wife ! " 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR , MY HAIR IS FALLING OUT . 

  I HATE YOU ! 

  I HATE YOU ! 

  I HATE YOU ! 

  I NEVER WANT TO SEE YOU AGAIN ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I keep thinking there are two of me ! 

  One at a time , please ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I think I am turning into a bridge ! 

  What has come over you ? 

  Three cars , two lorries and a motorbike ! 

  " Oooh ! 

  I am in terrible pain , doctor , " said the woman as she walked into the doctor's surgery . 

  " A wasp stung me on the finger . " 

  " Which one ? " asked the doctor . 

  " I do not know , " the woman replied . 

  " Wasps all look much the same to me . " 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  My wife thinks she's an elevator ! 

  Send her up to see me . 

  I cannot ! 

  She does not stop on your floor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Everybody treats me like I am a snooker ball ! 

  Get to the end of the cue ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  A dog's just bitten into my leg ! 

  Did you put anything on it ? 

  No . 

  He seemed to like it just the way it was . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I've just swallowed fifteen ten pence pieces ! 

  Why did you do that ? 

  I thought the change would do me good ! 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR . 

  I'M IN A CRITICAL CONDITION ! 

  I MEAN ... 

  JUST LOOK AT THIS CARPET . 

  HOW PERFECTLY AWFUL ! 

  The doctor was baffled by his patient's mysterious illness . 

  " I just cannot seem to work out exactly what's wrong with you , " he admitted . 

  " I can only imagine that it must be the drink . " 

  " Okay , doctor , " said the man . 

  " I shall come back when you're sober . " 

  DOCTOR ! 

  DOCTOR ! 

  EVERYBODY THINKS I'M A LIAR . 

  I DO N'T BELIEVE YOU . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I keep thinking I am invisible ! 

  Who said that ? 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Why does no one like me ? 

  You're stupid . 

  I want a second opinion ! 

  Okay . 

  You're ugly as well . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I keep seeing double ! 

  Lie on the couch , please . 

  Which one ? 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  My husband's outside ! 

  He thinks he's a Range Rover ! 

  Tell him to come in and see me . 

  He cannot ! 

  He's been wheelclamped ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I feel like a racehorse ! 

  I think you should stay in bed for a week or so . 

  I cannot ! 

  I am running at Cheltenham on Saturday ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I keep thinking I am a bell ! 

  Take some of these pills and if it does not clear up , give me a ring . 

  ... and another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR , IT'S MY HEART ! 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR , I'M FEELING A BIT FAINT . 

  " My goodness ! " exclaimed the doctor as a patient walked in with a huge swollen nose . 

  " What happened to you ? " 

  " I bent down to smell a brose in my garden , " replied the woman . 

  " There's no B in rose , " said the doctor . 

  " There was in this one ! " 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  My son's just eaten our telephone ! 

  What are you doing about it ? 

  I am phoning from the neighbours' ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I keep forgetting things ! 

  How long has this been going on ? 

  How long has what been going on ? 

  " Oh , Doctor ! " sighed the woman . 

  " I do not know what's wrong with me these days . 

  Most of the time , I just do not know where I am . " 

  " Yes , I can see that , madam , " replied the butcher . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  How long can a person live without a brain ? 

  I do not know . 

  How old are you ? 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I tend to get fat in certain places . 

  What should I do ? 

  Stay away from those places . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I keep thinking I am a bird . 

  Perch there and I shall tweet you in a minute . 

  ... and another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR . 

  I THINK I'VE PICKED UP A BUG OF SOME SORT . 

  " Oh , doctor , you've got to help me ! " wailed the woman . 

  " My husband was sound asleep with his mouth wide open when the cat ran into the room chasing a mouse ! " 

  " Why is that such a problem ? " asked the doctor . 

  " Well , the mouse jumped straight into his mouth and disappeared down his throat ! " explained the woman . 

  " In that case , " advised the doctor . 

  " Dangle some cheese in your husband's mouth to lure the mouse out . " 

  " All right , " said the woman , " and should I try dangling a fish there to get the cat out , too ? " 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I've just swallowed a bluebottle ! 

  Should I take anything for it ? 

  No , let it starve ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Have you ever seen anything like this before . 

  Only once , and I had to pay an admission fee . 

  Two old friends met in the street . 

  " Where are you off to , George ? " asked the first . 

  " I am going to see the doctor , Stan , " said the other . 

  " I do not like the look of my wife . " 

  " I think I shall come with you , " said his friend . 

  " I do not like the look of mine , either ! " 

  ... and here's another one from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR , MY MIND KEEPS PLAYING TRICKS ON ME . 

  PICK A CARD . 

  ANY CARD . 

  JOKES NOT TO TELL AT THE DOCTOR'S 

  Even if you are totally fearless and say things like " Ha ! 

  Amputated bottom ? 

  It's just a fleshwound . 

  I've had worse than that playing dominoes ! " , you should never tell the following jokes anywhere near the doctor's surgery . 

  Unless they've been on a course of laughing pills , no one at the doctor's will find these jokes in the least funny , and if you laugh at them , we recommend that you see a doctor as quickly as possible since your humour gland has obviously gone mental . 

  LOOKS LIKE HIS HUMOUR GLAND HAS GONE MENTAL ! 

  A man went to see his doctor one day . 

  " Doctor , " he said . 

  " I've got this terrible problem . 

  I find that nowadays I prefer cats to dogs . " 

  " There's nothing wrong with that , " said the doctor . 

  " In fact , I quite prefer cats to dogs myself . " 

  " Really ? " said the man . 

  " How do you like yours ? 

  Fried or boiled ? " 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Why do I keep walking round and round in circles ? 

  Shut up or I shall nail your other foot to the floor ! 

  ... and here's another from Viz ... 

  DOCTOR . 

  I'M FEELING RATHER FLUSHED . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  My little boy has just rammed a cheese sandwich up my nose ! 

  So why is he crying ? 

  He wants me to give him his lunch back ! 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I am at death's door ! 

  Do not worry , I shall pull you through . 

  Doctor ! 

  Doctor ! 

  I think I am turning into a sheep ! 

  How do you feel ? 

  BAAA-AAD ! 

  AT THE ZOO 

  The zoo's always a good place for a few laughs . 

  Most of the animals like a bit of a giggle and the hyenas will laugh at anything . 

  Hamsters , on the other hand , are a different kettle of piranhas altogether . 

  A hamster will go completely mental if you start slagging him off . 

  The little devil will tear the bars of his cage apart and shoot up your trouser leg with his teeth bared before you can say , " Only joking , Hammy ! " 

  BEWARE OF THE HAMSTER ! 

  Two explorers were lost in the depths of the jungle in the middle of the night . 

  " You know , " whispered the first one , " we should be okay as long as the batteries on our torches hold out . 

  I've heard that wild animals will not harm you if you're carrying a torch . " 

  " That really depends , " said the second one , " on how fast you carry it ! " 

  WHAT'S GREEN AND HARD ? 

  A FROG WITH A FLICK KNIFE ! 

  What animal do you look like when you're taking a bath ? 

  A little bear . 

  What do you get if you cross an elephant with a hedgehog ? 

  A two ton toilet brush ! 

  What's the last thing to go through a fly's mind when it hits the front of your car ? 

  Its back legs ! 

  THE NINE O'CLOCK NOSE 

  WHY DO WILD DOGS HOWL IN THE DESERT ? 

  BECAUSE THERE ARE NO TREES IN THE DESERT -- JUST CACTUS ! 

  Having escaped from their field , two goats wandered around for a while until they found themselves in a rubbish dump . 

  There were lots of interesting things lying around for them to eat and together they munched their way through a large book . 

  Then one of the goats chewed up a long roll of film and swallowed it . 

  " What was the film like ? " asked the other goat . 

  " Not bad , " his friend replied , " but I preferred the book . " 

  Sitting in the cinema one evening a woman was more than a little surprised to see a man walk in just before the film began with his pet crocodile at his side . 

  The man and the crocodile settled down to watch the film , then during the interval , the crocodile got up to go to the toilet . 

  " I must say , " the woman said to the man , " I am surprised than an animal like that can appreciate this film . " 

  " So am I , " replied the man . 

  " He hated the book ! " 

  Why are parrots obviously much smarter than chickens ? 

  Well , you do not get Kentucky Fried Parrot , do you ? 

  How do you make friends with a squirrel ? 

  Stand under his tree acting crazy and the squirrel will take you for a nut . 

  What's the difference between a forged fiver and a crazy rabbit ? 

  One is bad money and the other's a mad bunny ! 

  What do Tarzan and the animals sing at Christmas time ? 

  Jungle Bells . 

  What do you get if you cross a cow with a kangaroo ? 

  Nobody knows , but you'd have to milk it on a pogo stick ! 

  How do you stop a skunk from smelling ? 

  Cut its nose off ! 

  What do you call a ferocious lion in a bad mood ? 

  Sir ! 

  Bear -- How did your Full Moon Party go last night ? 

  Wolf -- Great ! 

  It was a howling success ! 

  Troublesome Nose Hares 

  Two ducks were flying over their favourite pond when they heard the sound of a hunter's gun and turned tail to flee . 

  " Quack ! 

  Quack ! " said one , and the other one screamed , " I am goin' as quack as I can ! " 

  A bumble bee flew frantically up the motorway with his back legs crossed , stopping briefly at each motorway service area as he passed it and muttering to himself : 

  " Drat -- that's Shell ! 

  Drat -- that's Esso ! 

  Drat -- that's Texaco ! " 

  " What's up with you ? " asked a moth as he flew by . 

  " Is not it obvious ? " cried the bee . 

  " I am looking for a BP station ! " 

  How do you stop a cockerel from waking you up at five o'clock on a Monday morning ? 

  Eat him on Sunday ! 

  What's the difference between dogs and fleas ? 

  A dog can have fleas but a flea cannot have dogs ! 

  Why did no one care when the owl lost his voice ? 

  Well , he could not give a hoot , either ! 

  Two cows were grazing in a field . 

  " All this mad cow disease is very worrying is not it ? " said the first cow . 

  " It does not bother me , " said the other cow . 

  " I am a banana ! " 

  What do you do with a sick sparrow ? 

  Get him tweetment ! 

  A boy walked into a pet shop . 

  " Got any puppies going cheap ? " he asked . 

  " No , " said the shopkeeper , " all ours go woof ! " 

  Where do baby apes sleep ? 

  In apricots ! 

  WHAT DO YOU CALL A SHEEP WITH NO LEGS ? 

  A CLOUD ! 

  A man walked into a bar with his pet alligator . 

  " Do you serve Americans here ? " he asked 

  " Of course we do , " replied the barman . 

  " Okay , " said the man . 

  " I shall have a pint of lager and two Americans for my alligator ! " 

  It was a quiet day in the clothes shop and the assistant there was rather surprised when his first customer walked in -- a large grizzly bear . 

  " Er ... what can I do for you , Mr Bear ? " he asked . 

  " I'd like a fur coat , please , " said the bear . 

  " What do you want a fur coat for ? " asked the assistant . 

  " Well , I'd look a right wally in an anorak , would not I ? " said the bear . 

  SPIDER JOKE 

  YOUR FLIES ARE UNDONE 

  At a local dog show one of the judges was puzzled by one of the entrants . 

  " This is a very strange breed , is not it ? " the judge said to the owner . 

  " What is it ? " 

  " It's a long tailed , short legged , long nosed retriever , " said the proud owner , " but some people call them crocodiles . " 

  JOKES NOT TO TELL AT THE ZOO 

  No , even the hyenas will not laugh at these and anyone who has to put up with you telling these gags is likely to let you take a closer look at the lion's cage -- like from the inside . 

  The inside of the lion that is ... you shall be lunch ! 

  Why did the fox cross the road ? 

  To eat the squashed rabbit ! 

  A bee and a butterfly settled on a flower together . 

  " Funny how your stripes look like a rugby jersey , is not it ? " said the butterfly . 

  " Actually , I used to play rugby , " came the reply , " but I was only in the B team . " 

  Why cannot leopards escape from zoos ? 

  Because they're always spotted ! 

  NOSE DIVE 

  " Bzzz , I am broke , " said the bee to the rabbit . 

  " Can I sting you for a pound ? " 

  How do you make your hamster a little fatter ? 

  Throw him off the roof and he will go " PLUMP " ! 

  AT THE TABLE 

  The only thing to remember about telling jokes at the breakfast/ lunch/ tea/ dinner/ supper table is not to make anyone sitting opposite you laugh when they've got a half-chewed mouthful of tomatoey mush or curried gunge . 

  You will never get the stains out of your t-shirt . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  There's a little slug on my lettuce ! 

  Just a minute , sir . 

  I shall fetch you a bigger one . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  What's this fly doing in my ice cream ? 

  Er ... learning to ski ? 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  This food is not fit for a pig ! 

  I shall take it back and find you some that is , sir . 

  At a dinner party in the British Embassy , an Italian General sat opposite the British Ambassador dressed in an impressive uniform decorated with an even more impressive display of medals . 

  " I say , " said the Ambassador to his aide . 

  " What did he get all those for ? " 

  " About four quid probably ! " the aide replied . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  I've found a worm in my spaghetti ! 

  Well , that's better than finding half a worm ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  What's that slug doing slithering through my salad ? 

  About 2mph , sir . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Why is there a piece of rubber in my shepherd's pie ? 

  Must have come off the shepherd's wellies , sir . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  I did not order this . 

  But you said you wanted to try something different ! 

  WAITER ! 

  WAITER ! 

  IS THIS CHICKEN FRESH ? 

  FRESH ? 

  IT JUST LAID AN EGG ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  There's a fly paddling in my soup ! 

  Do not you mean swimming , sir ? 

  No , you did not give me enough soup for that ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  This lobster has only one claw ! 

  Oh , it must have been in a fight , sir . 

  Well bring me the winner ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  There's a fly in my mince ! 

  Those little devils just do not care what they eat , do they ? 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  There's a fly in my soup ! 

  Oh , he's only little , he will not drink much . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  How long will my sausage be ? 

  About four inches , sir . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  I cannot eat this meat ! 

  Bring me the manager ! 

  But you cannot eat him either , sir ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  You've got your thumb in my soup ! 

  That's okay , sir , it's not hot . 

  Quasinoso 

  Snow White and the Seven Noses 

  WAITER ! 

  WAITER ! 

  HAS THE CHEF GOT A PIG'S HEAD ? 

  NO , SIR , IT'S JUST THE WAY HE PARTS HIS HAIR . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  There's an awful film on my soup ! 

  Well , what do you expect for 50p -- Ghostbusters ? 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Why are these flies playing football in my saucer ? 

  They have to practise , sir . 

  They're playing in the cup next week ! 

  The restaurant manager called all his waiters together to warn them about shady customers . 

  " Some of our diners , " he said , " seem to look upon our cutlery as a form of medicine . " 

  " What do you mean ? " asked one of the waiters . 

  " To be taken after meals ! " 

  ASTRONOSE 

  JOKES NOT TO TELL AT THE TABLE 

  On no account ever tell these jokes during a meal . 

  People will puke up all over the place and since it's your fault , you shall have to clear up the mess . 

  You probably would not be able to finish your pizza after all that , either . 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  You know the only difference between this pancake and a heap of fresh manure ? 

  No , sir . 

  This pancake is cold ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  Is this a slug in my steak pie ? 

  I think you shall find it's fat , sir . 

  I know it is ! 

  It's eaten all the pastry ! 

  A diner called the waiter over to complain about his food . 

  " Waiter , " he said , " these peas are as hard as rocks ! " 

  The waiter picked up a fork and tried a few from the man's plate . 

  " They seem quite soft to me , sir , " he said . 

  " So they should be , " the man replied . 

  " I've been chewing them for the past twenty minutes ! " 

  Waiter ! 

  Waiter ! 

  The beef surprise was lovely , but what's the surprise ? 

  It was dog food , sir . 

  WAITER ! 

  WAITER ! 

  THIS BREAD IS LOVELY AND WARM . 

  SO IT SHOULD BE , SIR . 

  THE CAT'S BEEN SLEEPING ON IT ALL AFTERNOON ! 

  AT HALLOWE'EN 

  Well , you do not really need to wait until Hallowe'en to tell monster jokes -- any old dark and stormy night will do . 

  Turn the lights down and gather round a roaring log fire , or log-effect on the electric heater if you're in a smokeless zone . 

  Then mingle the most gruesomest , grisliest ghost stories in among your jokes . 

  If there's a full moon , though , watch out for that hairy kid from down the road . 

  If he starts growling and howling , leg it , quick ! 

  All the little monsters were getting ready for school . 

  " Mum , where's my schoolbag ? " 

  " Mum , where's my breakfast ? " 

  " Mum , where's my bus money ? " 

  " Mum , where's my gym kit ? " 

  " Mum , where's my slimy old socks ? " 

  " Wait a minute ! " cried their mother . 

  " I've only got three pairs of hands ! " 

  A monster's mum was hanging up the washing in the garden when she suddenly yelled at him : 

  " Quick ! 

  Get the knives and forks and some bread and a few plates and take them next door ! 1 " 

  " Why , mum ? " asked the monster . 

  " The neighbour's just fallen into his barbecue ! " 

  Why do witches fly on broomsticks ? 

  Because a Hoover lead would never stretch far enough ! 

  Dracula went to the dentist and the dentist said : 

  " I do not think we've ever had a vampire in here before . " 

  " Well , " said Dracula , " fangs ai n't what they used to be ! " 

  Two monsters had just finished eating . 

  " I feel sick , " said the first one . 

  " I know , " said the other . 

  " You cannot keep a good man down ! " 

  Two monster pals met up on their way to the school one morning . 

  " We had burglars last night , " said the first one . 

  " Wow ! 

  That sounds exciting ! " said his pal . 

  " Not really , " said the first . 

  " They do not taste nearly as good as teachers . " 

  MUM , I HATE MY BIG BROTHER'S GUTS . 

  WELL , JUST LEAVE THEM AND EAT THE CHIPS . 

  " You're a bad piglet ! " scolded the mother pig . 

  " If your father could see you he would turn in his gravy ! " 

  What do you get if you cross a monster with a boy scout ? 

  A creature that frightens old ladies across the road . 

  1st Monster -- I am thinking about becoming a vegetarian . 

  2nd Monster -- Why's that then ? 

  1st Monster -- You can go off people you know ! 

  Monster -- You look like a million dollars . 

  Mrs Monster -- You mean I look wonderful ? 

  Monster -- No , you're all green and wrinkly ! 

  WHAT'S A MONSTER'S FAVOURITE SNACK ? 

  BEINGS ON TOAST ! 

  JOKES NOT TO TELL AT HALLOWE'EN 

  These jokes should never be told to your friends at Hallowe'en , on a dark and stormy night gathered round a roaring log effect electric heater , or at any other time for that matter . 

  These jokes are liable to turn all your friends into a bunch of werewolves , vampires , swamp monsters and slime creatures just so they can get their own back on you . 

  Of course , there's always the chance that your friends might already be a bunch of werewolves , vampires , swamp monsters and slime creatures just pretending to be normal ? 

  How can you tell ? 

  Well , slime creatures like dancing to Timmy Mallett records , but apart from that you've no way of knowing . 

  Take great care ... 

  " I'd like a nice big Dog , please , " said the monster , walking into the pet shop . 

  " This Alsatian is very nice , " said the assistant , " and he's completely house trained . " 

  " Never mind that , " said the monster . 

  " Will he taste good ? " 

  How do you make a witch twitch ? 

  Add a T. 

  How do you make a witch itch ? 

  Drop the W. 

  What do you call a one-eyed dinosaur ? 

  A Dyouthinkesesawrus . 

  Little Monster -- Daddy ! 

  Daddy ! 

  Granny's going out ! 

  Big Monster -- Pour some more paraffin on her , then ! 

  Two monsters were at a party . 

  " Ooh ! " said the first one to his pal . 

  " That good looking ghoul over there just rolled his eyes at me . " 

  " Well , do not just sit there , you fool , " his friend replied . 

  " Pick'em up and roll'em back ! " 

  AT SCHOOL 

  Everybody tells jokes at school , but most jokes are best kept for the playground . 

  Teachers , after all , are sensitive souls and easily upset -- especially P. E . 

  teachers . 

  If you get up the P. E . 

  teacher's nose he or she will think it's a brilliant laugh to give you so much detention that you shall be lucky to leave the class in time to pick up your pension . 

  Having talked for an hour about wild animals the teacher posed a question to one of her class . 

  " Roger , " she said " what would you do if you saw a ferocious tiger walking across the playground ? " 

  " I'd escape from it riding like the wind on a champion racehorse , " Roger replied . 

  " Oh , really ? " said the teacher , " and where would you get a champion racehorse from ? " 

  " Same place you got the ferocious tiger , Miss ! " 

  Teacher -- What's your name , boy ? 

  Pupil -- Colin Brown . 

  Teacher -- Say " Sir " when you talk to me ! 

  Pupil -- Okay . 

  Sir Colin Brown ! 

  Headmaster -- We will have only half a day at school this morning . 

  Pupils -- YAHOOO ! ! ! 

  Headmaster -- And we will have the other half this afternoon . 

  " How did you get on at school , Jane ? " asked her mother . 

  " Today I was the best swot in the whole school , mum ! " answered Jane . 

  " Really ? " said her mother . 

  " Yeah . 

  I swotted more bluebottles than anyone else ! " 

  " David , your Headmaster has sent me a letter , " said David's father . 

  " Er ... is that so ? " said David . 

  " Yes , " said his father . 

  " It seems he's not too happy with your appearance . " 

  " My appearance ? " said David . 

  " Yes . 

  You have not appeared at school since last month ! " 

  Teacher -- Give me a sentence using the word ANTENNAE . 

  Pupil -- There antennae chips for lunch 

  George walked into the classroom late one morning . 

  " Sorry , sir , " he said to the teacher . 

  " I slept in this morning . " 

  " What ? " said the teacher . 

  " You mean you sleep at home as well ? " 

  " What did you do on Saturday , Annabell ? " asked the teacher . 

  " Me and me mum we done our shopping , miss , " said Annabell . 

  " Really , Annabell , " scolded the teacher . 

  " What about your grammar ? " 

  " Oh , she done her own shopping , miss ! " 

  " Mum , I really do not want to go to school today , " he wailed . 

  " All the teachers hate me ! 

  All the pupils hate me ! 

  Nobody likes me ! 

  I am not going ! " 

  " But you must go , dear , " said his mother . 

  " After all , you are the Headmaster ! " 

  Teacher -- Give me six animals you would find in Australia . 

  Pupil -- Er ... a kangaroo and five sheep ! 

  Everything was quiet in the classroom . 

  The teacher had finally got her class settled down to some work . 

  Suddenly , someone let out an enormous burp . 

  " Who did that ? " snapped the teacher . 

  " Steve did , miss ! " said a tell-tale . 

  " Steve , " scolded the teacher , " tonight I want you to stay behind and write out I must not belch in class 100 times . " 

  " But I only burped once ! " wailed Steve . 

  Teacher -- What is the opposite of sadness ? 

  Wally -- Happiness . 

  Teacher -- Very good . 

  Not what is the opposite of glum ? 

  Wally -- Cheerful . 

  Teacher -- Quite right . 

  And the opposite of woe ? 

  Wally -- GIDDYUP ! 

  " Caroline , " said the music teacher , " I think you should give up violin lessons and try the piano instead . " 

  " I've already tried playing the piano , miss , " said Caroline , " but I could not get it under my chin ! " 

  Wanda was puzzling over how to do subtraction sums correctly and her teacher decided to try to explain things simply to her . 

  " Look , Wanda , " she said . 

  " You have ten fingers . 

  If you had four less what would you have ? " 

  " No more violin lessons , miss ! " 

  Mike was on his way home from school when he met his uncle whom he had not seen for ages . 

  " You look well , Mike , " said his uncle . 

  " I suppose I am , " agreed Mike . 

  " Especially since I've just had influenza , arthritis , pneumonia and eczema ! " 

  " My goodness ! " exclaimed his uncle . 

  " It must have been agony having all those things ! " 

  " It sure was , " replied Mike . 

  " Hardest spelling test I've ever had ! " 

  Teacher -- What did Sir Francis Drake say to his men before sailing off to defeat the Spanish Armada ? 

  Pupil -- Umm ... all aboard ! 

  Teacher -- If I put ten pound coins in my left trouser pocket and twenty pound coins in my right trouser pocket and fifty ten pence pieces in my back pocket , what would I end up with ? 

  Pupil -- Your trousers round your ankles , sir ! 

  It was the night of the school disco and a group of parents were standing in the corner as the kids enjoyed themselves on the dance floor . 

  " Look at that girl over there ! " gasped one stuffy woman . 

  " It's really not to easy to tell that she IS a girl , is it ? 

  She's wearing boy's jeans , a boy's shirt , boy's shoes and she's got a boy's haircut . 

  Also she's not too pretty , is she ? " 

  " She's my daughter , " was the reply . 

  " I am SO sorry ! " the woman apologised . 

  " I never realised you were her father . " 

  " I am not . 

  I am her mother ! " 

  " Did you have a nice lunch ? " asked the teacher as her pupils filed back into the classroom after school dinner . 

  " Yes , miss , " David replied . 

  " I eaten seven potatoes ! " 

  " I think you mean ate , David , " said the teacher . 

  " NO , it was definitely seven ! " 

  A Nose Bush 

  " Wash that stuff off your face at once ! " yelled the teacher . 

  " You know that only sixth form girls are allowed to wear make-up ! " 

  " But , miss ! 

  I shall be in the sixth form next term ! " 

  " That will make no difference , Kevin ! " 

  Teacher -- Does anyone have any interesting hobbies which they do at weekends ? 

  Pupil -- I go horseriding , sir . 

  Teacher -- That's very interesting , Angela . 

  Now , Wanda , can you tell me something you would find on a horse but not on any other animal ? 

  Wanda -- Angela's bum , sir ! 

  JOKES NOT TO TELL AT SCHOOL 

  Tell any of these jokes at school and you shall get worse than single detention . 

  You will get worse than double detention . 

  You will get worse than triple P. E. ! 

  You will get quadruple school dinners ! 

  And once you've finished that you shall be taken by special puke resistant ambulance to double triple quadruple maths with all that custard you could not eat being forced into you on a drip feed ! 

  Teacher -- Which famous person from history said " Let them eat cake ? " 

  Wally -- Er ... 

  Mr. Kipling ? 

  Two little girls were arguing in the playground about how old their teacher was . 

  " I know how we could settle this , " said one of the girls . 

  " How ? " asked the other . 

  " Look in her knickers , " was the reply . 

  " And how would that help ? " asked her friend . 

  " Well , " said the first little girl , " In my knickers it says " Age 8-10 " ! " 

  Amy arrived home from school early one afternoon . 

  " Why are you at home at this time ? " asked her mum . 

  " I was sent home because the girl next to me was smoking , " said Amy . 

  " So why did they send you home ? " her mum asked . 

  " It was me that set her on fire ! " 

  On Harry's first day at play school , his mum was about to take him along to meet all the other kids when it started snowing outside . 

  " Mum ! 

  Mum ! " he shouted . 

  " Can I wear my new yellow wellies ? " 

  " Of course you can , Harry , " said his mother , and off they went . 

  At the play school , Harry had to leave his brand new wellies in the cloakroom and , after a hard day playing with all the other kids , it came time to go home . 

  While all the other kids were pulling on their coats , the teacher found Harry sitting sobbing in the cloakroom . 

  " What's wrong , Harry ? " she asked . 

  " I cannot find my new yellow wellies ! " howled Harry . 

  " Are not these your yellow ones ? " asked the teacher . 

  " No ! " said Harry . 

  " Mine had snow on them ! " 

  AT YOUR OWN RISK 

  Some jokes are so awful that you should only ever tell them while you're wearing a decent pair of trainers . 

  You might have to make a quick getaway ! 

  Even the worst of gags will amuse some wally somewhere , though , so here are a few just in case you are ever unlucky enough to be trapped in a lift for days on end with him . 

  Keep him laughing and he might have second thoughts about eating you ! 

  What do you call a woman with only one leg ? 

  Eileen . 

  What's got a wooden door and flies ? 

  An outside toilet . 

  A Chinaman was suffering terrible toothache , so he phoned up the dentist to make an appointment . 

  " 2.30 okay ? " said the dentist . 

  " Yeah , tooth hurty plenty ! " said the Chinaman . 

  What wears a long coat and pants in the summer ? 

  A dog . 

  After winning a million pounds in the pools a man was interviewed by a television reporter . 

  " Do you think that all this money will change your life ? " asked the reporter . 

  " Certainly not ! " said the man . 

  " And what about all the begging letters ? " the reporter asked . 

  " Well , I shall just keep sending them ! " 

  A little old lady was sitting by her front doorstep stroking her cat one afternoon when the cat stood up and strolled across the road towards the park . 

  Just then , a car came round the corner and flattened the poor moggy . 

  " I am terribly sorry , " the driver said to the old lady . 

  " I am afraid I've just killed your cat . 

  I shall replace it , of course . " 

  " Really ? " said the old lady . 

  " But can you catch mice ? " 

  " Why did you leave your last job ? " asked the employer . 

  " It was something my old boss said , " replied the interviewee . 

  " What did he say ? " asked the employer . 

  " You're sacked ! " 

  Did you hear about the wally who went fly fishing ? 

  He caught a six pound bluebottle ! 

  What do men do standing up which women do sitting down and dogs do on three legs ? 

  Shake hands ! 

  " My delivery boy sat on the bacon slicer this morning , " said the grocer . 

  " Dear me ! " said the old lady . 

  " Is he all right ? " 

  " More or less , " said the grocer , " but he's got a little behind in his deliveries ! " 

  Nose Congestion 

  Nosey Parker 

  Why did the doctor tip-toe into his medicine cupboard ? 

  He did not want to wake the sleeping tablets ? 

  What do you get if you cross the Atlantic Ocean with the Titanic ? ... 

  About half way ! 

  I CAN DO BIRD IMPRESSIONS ! 

  I EAT WORMS ! 

  An unemployed actor went to his agent to complain about his agent not having found him any work in months . 

  " I am getting anything that's going . " 

  " Well , " said the agent , " they're looking for someone to play Long John Silver in a new production of Treasure Island . " 

  " Great ! " said the actor . 

  " I shall take it ! 

  Can I start on Monday ? " 

  " Oh , no , " said the agent . 

  " On Monday you shall be having your leg off ! " 

  What do Daffy and Donald like to watch on telly ? 

  Duckumentaries ! 

  What's the best way to keep an idiot waiting ... 

  I shall tell you later ! 

  A policeman caught a well-known burglar breaking in to the back of a shop late one night . 

  " Aw , give's a break , guv , " said the burglar . 

  " I never get anything from you lot . " 

  " Alright , " said the policeman , " take this slip of paper . " 

  " What's this , then ? " asked the burglar . 

  " What that , you can get one free bash on the head , " explained the policeman . 

  " It's a truncheon voucher ! " 

  Johnny -- What do you use to clean your front teeth with ? 

  Joey -- My toothbrush . 

  Johnny -- And your side teeth ? 

  Joey -- The same toothbrush . 

  Johnny -- And your bottom ? 

  Joey -- The same toothbrush . 

  Johnny -- BLEEUCH ! 

  I use paper ! 

  Nose Pickers 

  Two soldiers dived into a trench as enemy aircraft on a bombing run roared overhead . 

  " Blast ! " said the first soldier . 

  " I've left my false teeth behind ! " 

  " So what ? " his mate replied . 

  " They're not dropping sandwiches , you know ! " 

  What's the difference between lice and nits ? 

  Nits are chewier ! 

  Did you hear the one about the Russian soldiers on parade ? 

  The officer sneezed and six of them yelled out " Here sir ! " 

  WHAT GOES " I'M OUT ! 

  THUD ! " 

  A CARD PLAYER THROWING HIS HAND IN . 

  Hear about the Wally who burned his own ear off ? 

  Someone phoned him while he was ironing ! 

  Which nut invaded Britain ? 

  William the conker ! 

  The actor did not much fancy having his leg amputated , so he asked his agent if there were any other jobs going . 

  " Hmm ... " said his agent . 

  " There's a food company which wants someone to dress up for an advertisement as a giant slice of ham with cheese and tomato between two halves of an enormous bun . " 

  " Gee , " said the actor . 

  " Sounds like a big roll ! " 

  Did you hear about the workman who had a sausage stuck behind his ear ? 

  He'd eaten his pencil for breakfast ! 

  Did you hear about the man who went to the fancy dress party as a bone ? 

  A dog ate him at the bus stop ! 

  Which football players do not know each other at all ? 

  Glasgow Strangers ! 

  What goes " BOO-HOO ! 

  BOING ! 

  BOING ! " ? 

  Someone crying his eyes out ! 

  Did you hear about the night hunter who shot tigers by aiming right between their luminous eyes ? 

  He was eaten by two one eyed tigers walking along a path arm in arm ! 

  I divorced my wife for smoking in the toilet ! 

  Having a cigarette in the toilet does not sound that bad . 

  Oh , she did not smoke cigarettes -- she smoked mackerel ! 

  How do you make a rat float ? 

  I do not know ! 

  You take a scoop of Ice cream , a scoop of rat , add a little lemonade ... 

  Then the actor told his agent he wanted to see his name up in lights at the cinema . 

  " In that case , " said his agent , " I think you'd better change your name to TOILETS ! " 

  So the actor told the agent he would do brilliant bird impressions . 

  " That's no good , " said the agent . 

  " Bird impressions are not different enough . " 

  " Suit yourself , " said the actor and flew off out the window . 

  What's small and green and eats pebbles ? 

  A small green pebble eater ! 

  WHAT ROARS ALONG YOUR WASHING LINE AT 100MPH ? 

  HONDA PANTS ! 

  Woman -- I need a mousetrap , quick . 

  I've got a bus to catch . 

  Shopkeeper -- Sorry , madam , we do not make them that big . 

  What's yellow and white and goes from London to Birmingham at 125mph ? 

  The train driver's egg sandwich ! 

  I got fifty Valentine cards last year . 

  I was too shy to post them , though ! 

  What do you call a girl who carries an encyclopedia in her knickers ? 

  Smarty Pants ! 

  What must you be careful of when it's raining cats and dogs ? 

  Not to step in a poodle ! 

  A cowboy was out on the range when he came across an Indian with his ear pressed down hard against the trail . 

  " What you doin' down there , pardner ? " he asked . 

  " Stagecoach pass this way half an hour ago , " said the Indian . 

  " How can you tell that ? " asked the cowboy . 

  " IT RAN OVER MY HEAD ! " 

  I Say ! 

  I Say ! 

  I Say ! 

  What's red and lumpy , wears a mask and rides a horse through the desert ? 

  The Lone Raspberry ! 

  Why was the beach all wet ? 

  The sea weed . 

  Did you hear about the plastic surgeon warming himself by the fire ? 

  He melted ! 

  A con man was arrested and brought in to the police station . 

  " All right , " said the desk sergeant . 

  " What's your name ? " 

  " John Smith , " said the con man . 

  " Do not give me that , " warned the sergeant . 

  " I want your real name . " 

  " Okay , " said the con man . 

  " Napoleon Bonaparte . " 

  " That's better , " said the sergeant . 

  " You cannot fool me with all that John Smith nonsense ! " 

  What do you call a man with a car on his head ? 

  Jack ! 

  ANGEL AD-MEN MAKING HEAVEN'S FIRST ANDREX COMMERCIAL Right ! 

  Has anyone seen that puppy ? 

  What did the salad cream say in the fridge ? 

  Close the door , I am dressing ! 

  The Great Supremo was trying to attract customers to his stall at the funfair . 

  " I shall answer any question for five pounds ! " he called . 

  " That's a bit dear , is not it ? " said a passer-by . 

  " Yes ! " cried the Great Supremo . 

  " That'll be five pounds , please ! " 

  Three men were sentenced to death during the French revolution . 

  One of them was a real wally , so the others did not let him in on their plan . 

  They had bribed the executioner to jam a wooden peg in the side of the guillotine to stop the blade from falling all the way down . 

  When the first of them was brought to be executed , he placed his neck on the block and the executioner pulled the handle to release the blade . 

  As planned , the blade stuck halfway down . 

  " Since the guillotine has not worked , " announced the executioner , " this man must go free ! " 

  When the second prisoner was brought out , he placed his head on the block and exactly the same thing happened . 

  " Since the guillotine has not worked , " announced the executioner , " this man must go free ! " 

  Next , they brought out the wally who placed his head on the block but , being a wally , he did it the wrong way , facing upwards instead of downwards . 

  Then , just as the executioner was about to pull the handle he yelled out : 

  " Wait a minute ! 

  I see what's sticking it ! " 

  The hotel lift boy was showing off in his new high speed lift when a lady guest got in . 

  " Take me up to the twentieth floor , quickly , " she said . 

  The lift boy pushed the button for the twentieth floor and the button for full speed . 

  " That too quick for you ? " he asked when they arrived three seconds later . 

  " No , " said the woman . 

  " I always wear my knickers round my ankles . " 

  War of the Noses 

  What do you get if you cross a carpet with an elephant ? 

  A deep pile in your living room ! 

  Policeman -- Caught you red handed again , Napper . 

  Why do you always insist on burgling only second floor flats ? 

  Burglar -- Well , that's my storey and I am sticking to it ! 

  What's the difference between dogs and fleas ? 

  A dog can have fleas but a flea cannot have dogs ! 

  Where do pixies and elves go shopping ? 

  British Gnome Stores and Littleweeds ! 

  Eventually the actor got a part in Lassie . 

  He got the lead ! 

  JOKES TOO RISKY EVER TO BE TOLD ! 

  Even the most brilliant pair of trainers in the entire universe will not get you out of trouble quickly enough if you start telling any of these gags . 

  People will stuff cushions , pillows , quilts or even entire carpets in your mouth to shut you up . 

  They will throw anything handy at you -- a brick , a lamppost , a piano , an armadillo . 

  A suit of armour and a motorbike might be more use than a pair of trainers ! 

  So , if you ever see anyone roaring along the street on a motorbike wearing a suit of armour with a carpet in his mouth and being pelted with armadillos , you shall know what he's been up to ... 

  How do you get paper babies ? 

  Marry an old bag ! 

  Why was the bank clerk sitting up a tree ? 

  He wanted to be a branch manager ! 

  " Scuse me , missus , " said the bus conductor , " but did you know that you have a banana in your ear ? " 

  " Sorry , " said the woman . 

  " I cannot hear you . 

  I've got a banana in my ear ! " 

  Why is an elephant big and grey and wrinkly ? 

  Because if it was small and white and smooth it would be an aspirin ! 

  How can you tell when a motorcyclist has been having fun speeding on the motorway ? 

  By all the flies in his teeth . 

  AT THE FRONT DOOR 

  Knock ! 

  Knock ! jokes are okay in small doses -- like one every second leap year . 

  Choose your Knock ! 

  Knock ! jokes with great care and use them sparingly otherwise your friends will lay land mines in the garden path when they know you're coming or train sabre-toothed ninja attack sparrows . 

  And watch out for cunningly disguised snipers . 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Wendy . 

  Wendy who ? 

  Wendy bell break , then ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Yah . 

  Yah who ? 

  Calm down , you nutter ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Esther . 

  Esther who ? 

  Esther rent man ! 

  Open up ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Kent . 

  Kent who ? 

  Kent you guess ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Sarah . 

  Sarah who ? 

  Sarah any way to get you to open up ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Cecily . 

  Cecily who ? 

  Cecily question , is not it ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Pedro . 

  Pedro who ? 

  Pedro Poll Tax yet ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Phyllis . 

  Phyllis who ? 

  Phyllis bucket and I shall clean your windows . 

  KNOCK KNOCK ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Izzy . 

  Izzy who ? 

  IZZY ANYBODY IN ? 

  Knock knock ! -- Who's there ? -- Alec . 

  -- Alec who ? 

  Alectricity man . 

  I've come to read the meter . 

  Russian lookalike characters used for some of the letters in the following joke 

  KNOCK ! 

  KNOCK ! 

  WHO'S THERE ? 

  IVAN . 

  IVAN WHO ? 

  IVAN TO COME IN ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Waddle . 

  Waddle who ? 

  Waddle it take to get you to let me in ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Isabel . 

  Isabel who ? 

  Isabel broken or what ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Auntie . 

  Auntie who ? 

  Auntie gon na open the door yet ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  LIONEL . 

  Lionel who ? 

  LIONEL NOT WORK ! 

  I KNOW YOU'RE IN THERE ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Wanda . 

  Wanda who ? 

  Wanda let me in ? 

  It's freezing out here ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Howard . 

  Howard who ? 

  Howard you expect to find out , if you do not open up ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Cynthia . 

  Cynthia . 

  Cynthia who ? 

  Cynthia four jokes like this so far ! 

  KNOCK KNOCK ! 

  WHO'S THERE ? 

  DORIS . 

  DORIS WHO ? 

  DORIS STILL SHUT AND I'M STILL FREEZING OUT HERE ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Just Colin . 

  Just Colin who ? 

  Just Colin round for that fiver you owe me ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Ewan . 

  Ewan who ? 

  No , just me ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Olive . 

  Olive who ? 

  Olive here too , do not I ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Trish . 

  Trish who ? 

  That's a nasty cold you've got ! 

  KNOCK KNOCK ! 

  WHO'S THERE ? 

  DAWN . 

  DAWN WHO ? 

  DAWN LEAVE ME OUT HERE ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Rosa . 

  Rosa who ? 

  Rosa people out here waiting to get in ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Twit . 

  Twit who ? 

  You got an owl in there ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Adolf . 

  Adolf who ? 

  A dolf ball hit me in the mouf fo now I fpeak funny ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Owls . 

  Owls who ? 

  Yes , they do , do not they ? 

  KNOCK KNOCK ! 

  WHO'S THERE ? 

  IVAN . 

  IVAN WHO ? 

  IVAN IDEA YOU'RE NOT GOING TO LET ME IN ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Sis . 

  Sis who ? 

  SIS THE MILLIONTH " KNOCK KNOCK ! " 

  JOKE I'VE TOLD ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Mickey . 

  Mickey who ? 

  Mickey's stuck in the lock ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Arfur . 

  Arfur who ? 

  Arfur got ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Amy . 

  Amy who ? 

  Amy fraid I've forgotten ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Juno . 

  Juno who ? 

  " Course I do ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Europe . 

  Europe who ? 

  Europe early this morning . 

  KNOCK KNOCK ! 

  WHO'S THERE ? 

  POLICE . 

  POLICE WHO ? 

  POLICE LET ME IN , I'M LONELY ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Des . 

  Des who ? 

  Des no bell out here is there ? 

  Please Father , no more Knock ! 

  Knock ! jokes ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Don . 

  Don who ? 

  Don you ever open this door ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Ken . 

  Ken who ? 

  Ken I come in , please ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Justin . 

  Justin who ? 

  Justin the hallway at the moment ! 

  Knock knock ! -- Who's there ? -- Shelby . -- Shelby who ? 

  SHELBY COMING ROUND THE MOUNTAINS WHEN SHE COMES ! 

  KNOCK KNOCK ! 

  WHO'S THERE ? 

  WELCOME . 

  WELCOME WHO ? 

  WELCOME ON , OPEN UP ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Donna . 

  Donna who ? 

  Donna wan na hear any more of these stupid jokes ! ! ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Wayne . 

  Wayne who ? 

  Wayne you gon na open up ? 

  JOKES NOT TO TELL AT THE FRONT DOOR 

  On no account EVER tell these Knock knock ! jokes at anyone's front door . 

  Not only will you be left standing in the cold , 596 gallons of specially prepared lumpy semolina garnished liberally with dead dogs and donkey droppings will cascade down on you from a secret overhead trapdoor . 

  You have been warned . 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Sal . 

  Sal who ? 

  Salong way to Tipperary ... 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Nettie . 

  Nettie who ? 

  Nettie bell here then ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Butcher . 

  Butcher who ? 

  Butcher left leg in , your left leg out ... 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Hank . 

  Hank who ? 

  You're welcome ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Dunap . 

  Dunap who ? 

  What , right there on the carpet ? 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Carrie . 

  Carrie who ? 

  Carrie me across the threshold , darling ! 

  Knock knock ! 

  Who's there ? 

  Nick . 

  Nick who ? 

  Nicker elastic's burst ! 

  Let me in ! 

  The Serious Bit . 

  A MESSAGE FROM COMIC RELIEF 

  Comic Relief is now in its fifth year , and our serious commitment to the work we support grows -- as , unfortunately , does the need for that work . 

  AFRICA 

  We are still passionately committed to our work in Africa , where over the past years we've made 282 grants in 29 countries in support of both long term development and emergency work . 

  Long Term Development 

  We've given grants to ... 

  Farmers in Ethiopia , healthworkers to remove Guinea Worm in Burkina Faso , orphans in Mozambique , wells in Uganda , teachers in Kenya , health services in Somalia , schools in Sudan , carpenters in Zimbabwe and hundreds of others . 

  Emergency 

  Comic Relief was set up primarily in reaction to the famine in 1984 . 

  Food shortages now loom in the horn of Africa again , and we will continue to support emergency operations . 

  THE UK 

  We do not just help people in Africa . 

  There are also serious problems in the UK . 

  Over the past years we've made well over 1000 grants to organisations all over the UK , some probably just round the corner from you . 

  We've split our help into four areas of concern : 

  Homelessness 

  -- This is a real crisis area where young lives can be ruined in a matter of weeks . 

  We try to tackle the problem at all ends -- to prevent young people ending up on the streets , to provide a roof over their heads , and to search for long-term solutions . 

  Drug and Alcohol Misuse 

  -- We help young people in trouble and we also try to stop drugs and alcohol ever taking a grip . 

  Disability 

  -- We're working with lots of groups involving young people with disabilities fighting for independence , integration and rights . 

  Older People 

  -- Up and down the country , we are helping pensioners who are working to help themselves , to draw attention to their needs and improve their rights . 

  WE CA N'T CHANGE THE PROBLEMS OF THE WORLD , BUT WHAT RED NOSE DAY GIVES EVERYONE AT COMIC RELIEF AND ALL ITS SUPPORTERS IS AN OPPORTUNITY TO REACH OUT TO OTHER PEOPLE WITH THE MONEY THEY NEED TO RADICALLY CHANGE THEIR LIVES . 

  And remember ... 

  All the money sent to Comic Relief will go straight to support charitable projects in Africa and the UK . 

  None of it goes on salaries or administration because all of that is covered by sponsorship or by the interest on banked money . 

  Employee Attitudes to Relocation 

  A lack of knowledge about employees' willingness to move can disrupt the most carefully laid relocation plans . 

  This chapter analyses the problems associated with the relocation of organisations and with individuals moving within Britain and overseas . 

  How to predict employees' mobility is examined together with how to improve attitudes towards company relocation and individual relocation at home and abroad . 

  COMPANY RELOCATION 

  One of the main problems in relocating an organisation to another part of the country lies in trying to predict how many employees will move with it . 

  Relocation is bound to cause a certain amount of disruption in the running of the business . 

  If most of the employees based in the old location refuse to move with their firm , the organisation must recruit and train replacement staff . 

  New employees will need to start work as soon as the move has taken place and training plans must be initiated straight away if staff are to be effective quickly . 

  However , the time lags involved in a relocation exercise -- perhaps resulting from delays in obtaining and refurbishing new premises or from departments/ sections moving at different times -- can seriously affect recruitment and training plans . 

  Although manual and clerical staff may be replaced relatively easily , staff with special skills are hard to find . 

  If they refuse to move with the firm , the company will have a difficult task on its hands in trying to find suitable replacements . 

  The loss of key staff can be expensive in other ways too -- their contracts may well provide for more costly redundancy provisions than for junior employees . 

  MOBILITY 

  In trying to assess reactions to company relocation in terms of which staff will move , the following factors need to be taken into account : 

  Age ; 

  Sex ; 

  Marital status ; 

  Education level ; 

  Housing ; 

  Socio-economic group ; 

  Geographic region . 

  By analysing these factors and by determining a profile of the work-force , it is possible to gain a better idea of how many staff will move and who these staff are likely to be . 

  This in turn will influence decisions on the contents of the relocation/ redundancy packages . 

  Age 

  In general , mobility falls with age ; the most mobile being the 16 to 24-year-old age group . 

  However , the mobility of young workers may reflect that of their parents . 

  An independent survey on willingness of workers to move with their job was carried out in January 1983 by communications specialists , Milne and Stewart Consultancy . 

  A representative sample of the adult British population was asked : " If the company you work for had to move its premises , do you think you would or would not move with it and find a new home if it moved more than 50 miles away and gave you financial help to move ? " 

  ( A similar survey was also conducted in 1977 . ) 

  The results of this survey ( see Table 1.1 ) demonstrate clearly the fact that younger people are the most mobile . 

  Sex 

  In general , women are less likely to move than men . 

  This is usually a result of family and marriage ties and so an employer might expect young unattached female staff to be more willing to relocate than married women . 

  Table 1.2 provides a breakdown of willingness to move by sex as drawn from the Milne and Stewart Consultancy's survey . 

  The survey shows that more people were prepared to move in 1983 than in 1977 . 

  This may reflect a greater fear of unemployment in recent years . 

  Marital Status 

  Married women are less likely to move than unmarried women . 

  What is interesting , however , is that a Government Social Survey entitled Labour Mobility in Great Britain 1955-1963 , published in 1966 , found that married men were more likely to move than single men . 

  Although in recent years , as second incomes have become more important , it is debatable as to whether this finding would still hold true . 

  The Guardian's " People At Work Survey " ( published in January 1982 ) which covered 11 389 Guardian readers , was conducted in June 1981 . 

  It provides data on mobility as related to job change primarily for people in management , professional and technical occupations . 

  Surprisingly , this survey found that couples with large families were as likely to move as those without children . 

  Education level 

  The higher the level of education attained , the more likely the person will move . 

  The Government Social Survey mentioned above found that people with academic , technical or commercial qualifications were most likely to be willing to move . 

  Those with no skills or qualifications were least likely to do so . 

  These trends are also confirmed in the Guardian's " People At Work Survey " which found that some 49 per cent of those with a GCE/ CSE qualification would consider moving to take up their next job , 59 per cent of those with a first degree and 74 per cent of those with a doctorate would do so . 

  Housing 

  The Government Social Survey also found that local authority tenants were least willing to move . 

  Owner occupiers were more likely to relocate but the most likely were those in rented accommodation from private landlords or those living rent free . 

  Socio-economic group 

  Mobility can be seen to vary according to people's type of occupation and seniority . 

  In general , the higher the employee's seniority , the greater the willingness to move . 

  The Milne and Stewart Consultancy's survey provides data by socio-economic groups for 1977 and 1983 . 

  The survey used standard socio-economic groups : AB which covers management , professional , technical and administrative occupations ; C1 which covers other non-manual staff ; C2 which covers skilled manual workers ; and DE which covers the semi-skilled and unskilled . 

  As expected , the survey found that , in 1977 , willingness to move was highest amongst staff in the AB and C1 groups and lowest in the DE group . 

  But by 1983 , the picture had changed . 

  Semi-skilled and unskilled workers were more willing to relocate than management and professional staff . 

  This may well reflect the effect of the recession on manual workers' perceptions of work -- the importance of being in employment even if this means changing home . 

  Indeed , Table 1.3 shows that willingness to move amongst all socio-economic groups has increased in 1983 over the figures given for 1977 . 

  It is interesting to note that management and professional staff are the least certain as to whether they will move with their jobs . 

  Geographic region 

  Willingness to relocate within the UK also varies by region . 

  The Milne and Stewart Consultancy's survey indicated that the further away from London that people live , the more willing they are to move , with the least mobile staff living in London and the South East ( see Table 1.4 ) . 

  This causes problems for employers as most company relocations are from this area to other parts of the country . 

  The Guardian's " People At Work Survey " also indicated that mobility in the London and South East region is below that in other areas of the country ( see Table 1.5 ) . 

  Some regions are more popular to move to than others . 

  The Government Social Survey found that people preferred non-industrial areas to industrial regions . 

  The South West emerged as the most popular area to go to ; London and the non-industrial areas of the Midlands were also popular . 

  Reactions to relocation 

  The quickest way to find out people's attitudes towards relocation is to ask them . 

  Once a company knows who is moving it can form its relocation plans . 

  Why take the trouble of trying to assess from mobility predictions who will move and who will not ? 

  The answer is quite simple . 

  There is little point in telling the staff that relocation is in the air if there are no precise facts available to answer employees' questions . 

  Employees are unlikely to decide whether or not to move with their firm if they do not know when the move is taking place ; where the company is moving to ; who is affected ; what are the financial inducements to relocate ( if any ) ; what are the redundancy terms for those eligible for them who stay behind ; what are the medium and long-term prospects of the job in the new location ; and many other points of concern . 

  Once the word " relocation " is out , employees are bound to react negatively . 

  They feel threatened by the two alternative prospects -- move or take redundancy . 

  Rumour and gossip will spread and the employer may well find key staff and others so unsettled that they look for and find other jobs . 

  The number of staff who choose to relocate with their firm depends , to a great extent , on how they are informed of the move and provided with information on the new location . 

  It is important not to respond to rumour before company policies or procedures are drawn up . 

  A problem arises here : the company policies and procedures need to be based on some knowledge of employees' willingness to move but asking the employees whether they are willing to relocate will not provide constructive answers unless those concerned can have answers to their questions based on hard facts -- which are usually given in written policy statements . 

  The art , therefore , is in determining which staff need to be relocated and in drawing up a compensation package which will encourage most , if not all , of the key people to move . 

  If the relocation package is too generous , the company may find a higher percentage of non-essential staff moving with the firm and some employees , who would have moved for less , reaping substantial benefits . 

  Alternatively , if the relocation package is poor but the redundancy package generous , few staff will opt to move , leading to many redundancy claims and a recruitment and training problem when the company moves to the new area . 

  It is therefore necessary to strike a balance between the two sets of compensation packages . 

  Some firms do this by giving non-essential workers less generous relocation allowances than those given to key staff . 

  Senior staff may be offered the services of an independent relocation company . 

  Improving attitudes 

  To improve employees' attitudes to relocation , employers need to consider the following : 

  Preparation ; 

  Communication ; 

  Advice and assistance . 

  Preparation 

  Before implementing a relocation , ensure that whoever is organising the move is fully prepared to deal with employees' questions and anxieties . 

  Most relocation policies are developed around the issue of the finances involved in buying and selling property . 

  Employees' attitudes to relocation may well improve once they have learned what expenses they are entitled to under such policies . 

  Be prepared to inform employees of their entitlements . 

  However , not " being out-of-pocket " is only one factor . 

  Employees are bound to be concerned about their future prospects should they decide to relocate . 

  Continuity of employment and the company's commitment to the new area are of great importance . 

  Attitudes may well be negative if employees have cause to believe that after moving to a strange area , they may face redundancy . 

  Concern may also arise about the employment opportunities for a relocated spouse and school and future work opportunities in the area for children . 

  Employees may also be worried about the social life in the new area and leaving their friends behind . 

  Another major problem can arise in house price differentials . 

  Moving from a low cost to a high price housing area will be of concern : employees will wish to know how they can be helped to meet increased payments . 

  Even moving from high to low cost areas can raise difficulties -- employees may doubt that they will ever be able to move back to their home areas or other more expensive regions once they have committed themselves to living in a lower cost housing area . 

  Communication 

  How the move is announced can also affect attitudes . 

  If employees are provided with detailed information packs on the proposed new area at the time of the announcement this can go a long way to answering some of their questions and thus reducing anxiety . 

  Reassurances may need to be given on continuity of employment . 

  Involvement with trade union representatives within the organisation concerned may prove valuable in respect of getting this particular message across . 

  To convey more information about the new location , companies might consider running tape/ slide presentations on the area or taking employees to the new site so that they can see what it is like . 

  The latter measures may be carried out by a company representative or the organisation may choose to bring in an outside specialist to run this part of the communications exercise . 

  Advice and assistance 

  Advice on opportunities in the new area can be given through counselling . 

  This could take the form of group briefings or individual counselling sessions with the employee ( and possibly the employee's spouse ) . 

  As with communications , counselling sessions can be carried out by an officer of the company or by an outside independent specialist . 

  Employees should understand the various forms of relocation assistance which may be given and what terms are available under the redundancy clause should moving remain an unattractive prospect . 

  INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEE TRANSFERS 

  Individuals asked to transfer to another location are , in general , key staff . 

  They have been chosen for the posts in other parts of the country because their employers consider them to be the best people for these particular jobs . 

  By and large it is , therefore , in their best interests , with regard to career prospects , to accept these postings . 

  However , a number of companies report that employee attitudes towards relocation under such circumstances are becoming increasingly less favourable . 

  Some employees believe that the trauma of uprooting their families and homes outweighs any benefits that may be gained by taking up a new position ( possibly a promotion ) somewhere else in the country . 

  If the key person identified for the transfer does not want to move there will probably be a number of career-hungry individuals on the payroll who will willingly step into the vacant position . 

  Rather than try to change the reluctant-to-move employees' attitudes or even find out why they reject the transfer , companies may accept the easy option and transfer other willing individuals . 

  However , before taking this step , the organisation should consider whether these people are right for the job . 

  After all , if the executives fail in the new location , the employer will have made a costly mistake . 

  Another problem to consider is that if the people identified for transfer do not go , what happens to their career prospects ? 

  If the refusal of a transfer effectively stops an individual's career-route to the top , the chances are that he or she will look for another job . 

  As a result the employer loses a valuable employee . 

  Alternatively , if the employee receives promotion after refusing a transfer , this may be seen as a precedent by other staff when their turn comes to be asked to move . 

  Although a company can not expect all staff offered transfers to other parts of the country to accept them , it can take steps to improve employees' attitudes towards relocation . 

  One of the specialist relocation companies , Merrill Lynch Relocation Management International , sponsored a " Study Of Employee Relocation Policies Among Major UK Companies " in 1984 which was conducted by the Harris Research Centre by a poll among " The Times Top 1000 companies " . 

  Of the 243 companies interviewed , 56 per cent considered the disruption of children's schooling to be a very or fairly serious problem for transferred staff . 

  Other problems listed in the study were : having to live in a more expensive environment ( 41 per cent ) ; inability of spouse to find work after relocation ( 35 per cent ) ; and families having to make new friends ( 14 per cent ) . 

  Improving attitudes 

  The first step which should be taken by employers wishing to improve individual employees' attitudes towards relocation is to provide counselling . 

  This can be undertaken by a member of the company's staff -- such as the personnel manager or employee welfare manager -- or the company could employ an outside specialist to help . 

  The specialist relocation companies can provide a counselling service or there are a number of independent consultants who can carry out this task . 

  Counselling should explore the employee's concerns about the move and try to allay fears . 

  However , although the employee needs to be " sold " the attractions of the new job/ new area , it is important that questions are answered truthfully and realistically . 

  If an employee decides to accept the transfer as a result of a counselling session which gave a misleading impression , it can only spell trouble for his or her future happiness in the job . 

  The employee's spouse and even the children as well may be invited to the counselling sessions . 

  If anxieties are ironed out before a transfer takes place , the employee is less likely to be under the pressure of family concerns when taking up the new appointment . 

  To convey exactly what the new area is like , some counsellors run audio-visual presentations . 

  Many firms pay for an employee ( and spouse ) to visit the new area to assess its suitability . 

  Employee attitudes towards a move may be made more favourable if the employer allows the relocation to take place during school holidays . 

  If the employer offers assistance towards housing costs , worries about living in a more expensive environment may be allayed . 

  If the employer offers help with finding new employment for the spouse -- for instance by talking to company contacts in the area -- this , too , can help the employee and family to feel more positive about moving . 

  A suitable relocation compensation and benefits package also needs to be provided . 

  And , possibly even more important for the employee's long-term security , the employer should provide assurances on the employee's future with the company as far as this is known . 

  INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEE TRANSFERS ABROAD 

  Employees offered a transfer which involves relocation overseas will consider the pros and cons very carefully , as accepting such a transfer is a major step to take . 

  Employee attitudes are likely to range from excitement at the prospect of living and working in a foreign country to dread of having to adapt to a different climate , culture and life style . 

  Employers pay a hefty price if the executive relocated overseas fails in the post -- for whatever reason -- and is forced to return home . 

  So , it is therefore important to find out exactly what attitudes the employee and family have towards working abroad before posting them out . 

  Areas of concern 

  Employees' attitudes towards the country concerned may be based on false pre-conceptions . 

  Employees may take an instant like or dislike to a particular place according to what they believe it to be like . 

  Papua New Guinea , for example , may conjure up ideas of tropical jungles which could well appeal to would-be explorer executives but not to the home-loving family types . 

  The executive may therefore accept or reject the whole idea of a transfer abroad on this basis alone . 

  And problems are bound to arise when the attitudes of the spouse towards a particular country are completely different from that of the employee . 

  Another area of concern revolves around job prospects . 

  Take , for example , an executive who is sent abroad on a two or three year contract . 

  When arriving at the foreign post , will he or she be in a less senior capacity than in the home country because of unfamiliarity with local customs and methods of working ? 

  Similarly will the employee lose out when coming back to Britain ending up two or three years behind the progress of peers who stayed at home ? 

  A period of working on contract abroad could leave the employee worse off than not going at all . 

  Other problems can arise with how the employee's spouse will cope with living abroad and what the spouse's employment prospects will be . 

  This applies not only while out on contract but also on returning to the home country . 

  The transferred executive will automatically return to a job in the home country ; the spouse will not . 

  Concern over children and their education is another major problem area . 

  Families can be torn in trying to decide whether children should accompany their parents abroad and receive their schooling there or whether they should remain in the home country at a boarding school . 

  People posted abroad are also unhappy about losing touch with family and friends or they may even worry about what will happen to pets . 

  One problem area for transferred executives is what to do with their homes and personal effects . 

  Renting out the family home while working abroad on contract may not be particularly appealing ; but selling it and having no stake in the home housing market on returning at the end of the contract is by no means an ideal solution . 

  Whether to take personal effects abroad or not -- and anxiety about their safe transport or storage -- is another area of worry for relocated executives and their families . 

  Trying to find somewhere to live in a strange country may also be a concern . 

  Add all these problems together and it would not be surprising if some employees refuse foreign postings . 

  Improving attitudes 

  It costs companies considerable sums of money to send employees abroad to work . 

  It is therefore sensible to ensure that those going are adequately briefed on exactly what their new country is like to live and work in . 

  So that employees can truly assess the new country , some firms pay for short " look-see " visits so that the executive and spouse can judge for themselves , first-hand , as to whether they should accept the transfer . 

  Such visits may confirm or dispel anxieties about living conditions , climate and culture . 

  Either way , the executive and family will have gained more facts on which to base their decision . 

  Employee counselling sessions run in addition to briefing courses and " look-see " trips allow employees to raise further questions . 

  It is advisable for a company to employ specialist counsellors who have a detailed knowledge of the new country to run such sessions . 

  It is also wise to invite the employee's spouse ( and even the children ) as they too , will have anxieties about the transfer which will need to be resolved . 

  These steps are likely to result in many employees' worries being reduced and their attitudes towards relocation abroad becoming more favourable . 

  To improve attitudes further , employers need to explain the provisions of the compensation and benefits package fully . 

  Drawing attention to paid visits back to the home country may help to reassure the family that they will not be completely cut off from relatives and friends . 

  The employer may wish to engage specialist relocation and international removal firms to deal with the employee's property ( rent it out or sell it ) and to transport household effects to the new location . 

  These firms can usually advise on procedures for taking pets abroad and the relocation firms can help with finding property in the new country . 

  Not all employees are going to react negatively to a relocation abroad . 

  Some may leap at the chance . 

  It is important to understand why people are favourably disposed towards a move , just as much as it is important to know why they are unhappy about going . 

  Some employees may look forward to the opportunity of experiencing life in a foreign country ; others may be keen on the compensation package -- the lure of tax-free earnings in some countries is strong . 

  But positive attitudes can turn into negative ones on arrival in an unfamiliar land especially if it is customary for expatriates not to mix socially with local people but for locals and expatriates to live in separate communities . 

  If this is the case , it is better for employees to know and understand this before going abroad rather than to go out with high hopes only to return to Britain dispirited . 

  The Relocation of Companies 

  This chapter discusses the issues facing organisations contemplating a group relocation and presents five case studies of firms which have undergone such a move recently . 

  WHY RELOCATE ? 

  Organisations may choose to relocate to a new area for a variety of reasons . 

  One may be cost . 

  Rent , rates or the cost of services may prove to be too expensive in the organisation's present site . 

  Or if a firm's lease is due for renewal or the rent is due for review , this may prompt a firm to relocate . 

  Moving to a new area may not only result in lower rent and rates but also lead to reduced transport and travelling costs and perhaps lower labour costs . 

  And financial assistance available in the new area may reduce the cost of rent , capital equipment , etc. further . 

  Another reason why firms choose to move is because of changing needs for space . 

  Existing operations may have outgrown space available in the old location and it may be impossible , owing to planning restrictions or the space actually available , to expand . 

  To overcome this problem in the short-term , firms may well find themselves taking on a number of small sites in the general area . 

  However , this usually leads to a proliferation of costs as well as inefficient working , as time and money are spent in linking the activities of the various sites . 

  Relocation to a new area could , therefore , provide the opportunity to consolidate on one site and to provide sufficient area for future expansion . 

  Firms may also decide to relocate because their existing locations are no longer convenient for clients , customers , suppliers and sales outlets . 

  Or they may move because their old location is not well placed for transport facilities . 

  Another factor which may influence a firm's decision is that of competition from other firms in the same line of business . 

  If the local market is saturated , it may be wise to move elsewhere to develop a new market . 

  However , firms must consider that moving to a new area can break ties with existing customers and suppliers and could lead to a loss of business if new links are not forged straight away . 

  On the other hand , rather than move away from an area where similar firms operate , some firms may consider that it is in their own particular interest to move into such a location . 

  One of a firm's greatest resources is its people . 

  The current area may not appear attractive to staff , possibly because of high house prices , and so firms may want to move to help their recruitment or perhaps reduce their staff turnover levels . 

  Before taking any decision to relocate , organisations should consider carefully whether relocation is the answer to their problems . 

  For instance , if a reorganisation or modernisation of the current site is carried out this may result in the space savings required . 

  Perhaps some functions could be centralised , others eliminated and some sub-contracted . 

  This might dispose of the need to relocate . 

  And , with recruitment and turnover of staff , the company should examine its procedures thoroughly to find out whether its inability to recruit skilled people or reduce its high turnover rates could be the result of bad management practice rather than the location . 

  Also , before deciding to embark on a relocation exercise , it is important to ensure that the proposed timing is appropriate . 

  The effect that the move will have on peak periods of demand from customers should be considered . 

  Also , to benefit , for example , from financial assistance in the new area , the relocation may have to happen when grants are available . 

  And , if the organisation plans to relocate to areas in anticipation of new services being built , such as road links or new housing , timing is important . 

  If the business relocates too early or if the proposed developments are delayed , the organisation will need to have contingency plans on how the business will operate and where relocated employees will live until these new services are completed . 

  PLANNING 

  In order for a relocation exercise to be carried out effectively , planning is crucial . 

  Those responsible for planning the move must be experienced enough and have the time to spend on dealing with all the issues that arise . 

  For the process to proceed smoothly it is necessary to ensure that responsibility for overall policy decisions is assigned to an appropriate individual or group ( for instance the managing director or the board of directors ) . 

  If the organisation appoints committees to deal with aspects of planning , policy forming and co-ordination there needs to be clear lines of communication so that everyone involved knows the person to whom the committee reports . 

  Day-to-day decision making should be assigned to a particular person if this is not carried out by the board member(s ) who have overall responsibility for the policy . 

  Those in charge of planning the relocation will need to establish exactly what key tasks need to be carried out , when , and in what order these should be done . 

  All plans should then be assessed to determine whether they are realistic and the effect they will have on employees , suppliers , customers , and so on . 

  As part of the planning process , it is necessary to establish the organisation's basic requirements and also any special demands which will need to be fulfilled . 

  For instance , the planners should work out if it is in the organisation's best interest to move into an existing building and whether such a building needs any refurbishment or , whether premises should be custom built . 

  Should the relocation take place in one complete stage or should the process be phased ? 

  If everyone is to move at the same time , the new premises need to be ready in their entirety to house all the people and equipment being moved . 

  Alternatively , if the move is phased , some parts of the new building will need to be completed ahead of others . 

  There are advantages and disadvantages to either . 

  A single one-off move may be disruptive to overall business activities but at least the process is carried out over a short time . 

  A phased move may prove ideal if the original location of the company is spread over several sites as one site can move at a time and so not cause total disruption to the business . 

  On the other hand , in administration terms , suppliers , customers and employees will need to know which part of the operation is in which place and when it will be there , otherwise communication between the different sites may become confused . 

  It is also important to determine which activities and functions should be housed in the new and old locations especially if the organisation plans to carry out either a phased move or to keep a small presence in the old site after the main move has taken place . 

  Besides working out space requirements in the new location , the planners have to decide whether the organisation needs any special facilities both for its own operations and for its employees . 

  Examples might include the need for strengthened floors for heavy equipment or high ceilings to house special machinery . 

  Loading bays and car parking facilities may also be necessary . 

  The planners also have to investigate what local services are available including transport , housing , schooling for employees' children , sports facilities , shopping , and so on . 

  Planning the move itself is also necessary . 

  Quotations for the removal need to be obtained and a contractor chosen . 

  The planners must work out in which order departments , functions or sites move and who will be responsible in each for overseeing the removal process . 

  If there are any special needs , such as the transport of dangerous substances or classified documents , these too must be planned . 

  The delivery date for new furniture and equipment needs to be arranged so that the new site is fully operational once all the equipment and goods have been transferred . 

  The company can expect to draw on the advice of many different specialists and institutions during and after the initial planning stage . 

  These include : architects , builders , surveyors , lawyers , bankers , local authorities and Government agencies , management consultants and relocation specialists . 

  It may also prove helpful to talk to other firms which have relocated to find out how they went about planning and executing the relocation , the problems they faced and how they overcame them . 

  New location 

  Before choosing a new location it is necessary to draw up a list of all the company's requirements and objectives . 

  In this way , many possible locations can be eliminated immediately leaving more time for the planning group to concentrate on the details which will determine exactly which site is the best one . 

  For instance , distance from motorways , railways or airports must be considered when choosing a new location . 

  Added to this , a company may wish to cut its costs or to benefit from Government or local authority financial assistance . 

  It may also want to move to an area which appears attractive to staff and where housing costs are reduced . 

  The new location could be only a few miles from the present site -- especially if one of the company's priorities is to retain existing staff . 

  When all the various factors are added together , the choice of new locations may prove to be very limited . 

  Cost 

  Relocation to another area is not cheap . 

  Professional advice on funding the move is likely to be required . 

  Costs include : buying or leasing the new property ; building and refurbishment ; staff costs ( including redundancy/ severance payments , retention payments if staff are to be encouraged to stay until the move goes ahead , recruitment and training costs for new staff and relocation and removal allowances for those moving ) ; communication costs ( including the installation of telephone and telex facilities and changes to stationery ) ; occupancy costs ( including rent , rates , lighting , heating and security ) and other costs ( such as new machinery and the cost of removal of goods from the old to the new site ) . 

  Some cost savings may be offset against this total , such as money received from grants and savings made on rent and rates . 

  Firms need to include a contingency fund within the budget . 

  Although the costs of relocating can usually be easily quantified , the benefits associated with the relocation often can not , in the short term , be transferred into cash values . 

  Any relocation depends on a detailed cost/ benefit analysis being carried out to ensure that the exercise is truly worthwhile . 

  EMPLOYEES AND RELOCATION 

  What information should be given to the work-force ? 

  If employees hear rumours of an impending move , they are likely to be very apprehensive about their future with the firm and worry about having to uproot themselves and their families to move to an unfamiliar area or take redundancy . 

  Neither option will appear attractive . 

  Staff may , therefore , begin looking for alternative employment in the local area so that they will not be forced to make the choice of a job with their employer or no job at all . 

  Rumours of a relocation can spread quickly . 

  This puts management in a difficult position . 

  It can either refuse to comment on the possibility of a move until some concrete decisions have been taken as to where the company will relocate to and when the move will occur or it can adopt a more open style and keep the staff or union representatives in the picture about developments taking place within the relocation programme . 

  Either way , some employees may look for other jobs to avoid being made redundant or having to relocate . 

  When informing employees of a likely relocation , employers need to present as full a picture as possible of the reasons why the move is necessary and the effect that it will have on existing jobs . 

  Union representatives are particularly concerned to find out as many facts as possible to keep their members fully informed and to negotiate the best deal they can , both for those moving with the firm and those accepting redundancy . 

  Likely subjects to be included on the list for discussion with staff or union representatives include : reasons for moving and details of the new company location and its facilities ; the effects of the move on existing jobs and organisational structure ; union bargaining rights at the new site ; the relocation and redundancy policies ; job opportunities at the new location -- for employees , their spouses and also for children nearing working age ; how to avoid disruption to employees' children's schooling and the relocation timetable . 

  Before embarking on briefing exercises with staff or negotiating discussions with unions , management needs to consider the sorts of questions that are likely to be raised and to have answers available . 

  Staff's anxieties will grow if their questions remain unanswered . 

  COMMUNICATION 

  There are many ways in which the work-force can be told about the relocation . 

  Briefing groups and negotiations with union or employee representatives have already been mentioned . 

  Other methods include sending letters to all employees and holding meetings for groups of employees or for all employees . 

  Communication to staff may come straight from the top , with the highest levels of management informing all employees of the move or top management may inform senior management who , in turn , hold meetings with supervisors to explain how and why the relocation exercise will take place . 

  It is likely that many follow-up meetings will need to be held after the initial announcement is made to communicate progress and to deal with employee problems as they occur . 

  The communication exercise may involve bringing in relocation consultants to answer employees' questions and provide advice . 

  Audio-visual presentations indicating the facilities available in the new area may be shown and a company newsletter may be launched to explain the move . 

  News of a proposed relocation should not only be communicated to employees but should also be given to suppliers and customers . 

  Publicity 

  A group move is likely to attract attention from the media . 

  The relocation of large companies is likely to attract national television , radio and newspaper coverage . 

  Even smaller firms moving away from an area may get press coverage in local newspapers . 

  Management will therefore need to be able to have sufficient information to present an accurate account to the media . 

  Any such media coverage should , in no way , present different factual information from that supplied to employees who should also hear about it first . 

  ALLOWANCES 

  The allowances given to staff moving as a result of a company relocation may be the same as for individual staff transferring at company request . 

  ( Details of relocation allowances are given in the next chapter . ) 

  Alternatively , the relocation package may be more or less generous . 

  Individuals transferring as a result of a promotion have more incentive to move to the new location than those being asked to move as a result of a group move . 

  Some companies therefore give employees in the latter situation an additional incentive payment to encourage them to move . 

  On the other hand , employers who value the services of key individual employees and are dependent on them accepting a transfer may give them more generous relocation packages . 

  Much depends on company policy and philosophy . 

  This raises the question of eligibility for relocation allowances . 

  Relocating an employee can prove very costly . 

  To reduce costs some firms lay down eligibility criteria for relocation assistance . 

  For instance , if support staff can be recruited locally in the new site , firms may restrict eligibility for relocation assistance to senior employees or to those with specialist skills who could not easily be replaced . 

  Alternatively , assistance can be based on a sliding scale , with greater financial help given to key employees and the more junior workers given only some elements of the package . 

  One problem which an employer may face is that of an employee accepting the relocation package , moving to the new area and then leaving the company to go to another local firm . 

  To prevent such financial losses being made on the payment of relocation allowances , some employers make relocation payments in the form of a loan , which employees have to repay if they leave the organisation within a fixed number of years ( often one or two years ) of the date of the move . 

  Organisations may also not wish to pay relocation allowances to staff approaching retirement . 

  This may involve suggesting such employees take early retirement or making them redundant . 

  REDUNDANCY PAYMENTS 

  Redundancy faces those staff who choose not to relocate or who are ineligible for relocation assistance and will not move without it . 

  Once employees are certain they are not going to move with the company , they are going to look for alternative work . 

  If they leave before the relocation takes place , this could put the employer in severe difficulties with regard to staff shortages . 

  Many firms , therefore , pay retention bonuses or give redundancy payments above the statutory minima to those staff who stay until an agreed date . 

  This generally enables business to continue as usual until the move takes place . 

  In drawing up the relocation and redundancy packages careful consideration needs to be given to the financial implications for employees of one vis--vis the other . 

  If the redundancy package is too generous many staff will opt for that and not even consider relocating . 

  If the relocation package appears very favourable , the company may find itself paying out relocation costs for more staff than it had budgeted for . 

  It is important to strike a balance so that the employees required by the company in the new area actually do choose to relocate and those which can be replaced easily stay behind . 

  PROBLEMS 

  Employees from the old location may be reluctant to move immediately , preferring to wait until their children finish important examinations . 

  Some firms are very flexible on this issue and where possible , allow them to relocate at a later date . 

  Employees' spouses may also have difficulty in finding work in the new area . 

  Generally , companies can not do much to help , although some try to employ relocated employees' spouses or inform them of job vacancies in other firms in the area . 

  Some companies help employees' spouses to find work by contacting Jobcentres or the local Chamber of Commerce . 

  New staff recruited locally who are not trained in the company's methods can not make a full and effective contribution to the running of the business straight away . 

  This may lead to problems with regard to business efficiency . 

  Where possible , some overlap of working between the staff employed in the old and new locations can help to ease this difficulty although such arrangements do present their own problems in terms of transporting staff to and from the old or new buildings . 

  The following five case studies , two of which are treated in depth and three in brief , outline how the organisations concerned carried out their group moves . 

  They indicate typical problems facing firms undertaking a group relocation exercise , how and why particular decisions were made and how particular points of difficulty were overcome . 

  R. S. COMPONENTS Ltd 

  Background 

  R. S. Components distributes electrical and electronic components in the UK and currently employs 1400 people . 

  Between June 1982 and September 1984 , it relocated from premises in the City of London to Weldon , near Corby . 

  The company was formed in 1937 as Radiospares Ltd and grew quickly . 

  It moved premises five times in five decades to keep abreast of space requirements . 

  In the late 1960s the company took over premises in the City of London and grew by adding overflow locations . 

  By the late 1970s it was operating out of two headquarters buildings in the City , warehouses in north London and Milton Keynes and a packaging factory in Hertford . 

  There was an obvious need to bring operations together to maintain high levels of customer service and cut the proliferation of unnecessary costs which arose from being in five separate sites . 

  R. S.'s historical roots were in London and so careful consideration was given to remaining there . 

  However , staying was ruled out by the realisation that it was impossible to find a suitable single site to accommodate all the various departments . 

  R. S. decided that , like many other companies , its business really needed custom-built premises with potential for expansion . 

  It was therefore necessary to find a large , greenfield site of the kind unobtainable in London . 

  A number of factors influenced the company's choice . 

  A large site ( at least 30 acres ) was required . 

  It was also important that planning restrictions would not prevent R. S. creating an ideal environment for the company's expanding business . 

  It was crucial that the postal and telephone services , access roads , car parks , electricity , gas , drainage , etc. should be available or could easily be provided . 

  The site needed excellent communications with the rest of the country ; R. S. would not survive in a distribution business if this was not available . 

  The area also had to offer attractive living conditions for staff . 

  The company considered many sites which fulfilled some but not all the criteria . 

  For a long time Milton Keynes was the favoured location . 

  However , the costs of building and of providing the necessary infrastructure together with planning restrictions meant that it was less than ideal . 

  By the end of 1981 Corby was chosen from a very short list of places . 

  But even in Corby only one site , that of Weldon , suited all the company's requirements . 

  ( Several alternatives were subject to possible subsidence due to previous iron-ore mining . ) 

  The company chose Weldon as being the best site because : 

  Weldon was in an Enterprise Zone created by the Government to help the nearby town of Corby . 

  The corporate tax relief and lack of planning restrictions within an Enterprise Zone created very favourable conditions for a service company like R. S. Components to expand and grow ; 

  It was a greenfield site which allowed R. S. to construct buildings which suited its commercial needs exactly and which would provide excellent facilities for staff ; 

  There was plenty of land around the site which would allow easy expansion when that became necessary ; , 

  Weldon was known to have excellent transport and communications links with the rest of the country ; 

  Weldon is within easy reach of major towns like Leicester , Peterborough and Northampton . 

  Housing was cheap and easily available ; 

  The area possessed a large labour pool . 

  The site was chosen in December 1981 . 

  By April 1982 , R. S. had received the freehold title for its site from the Commission for the New Towns . 

  Building began that year and by February 1984 the warehouses were occupied and by April the offices were ready too . 

  Relocation or redundancy 

  At the outset R. S. had no idea of how many staff would relocate or how many would choose redundancy . 

  R. S. designed its relocation package to take the financial considerations out of moving so that the staff could make their work/ career decisions without worrying about the costs of relocation . 

  Similarly the redundancy package was geared to match the relocation package so that staff would not base their decision on financial matters . 

  The terms of the redundancy package for those who stayed until the relocation took place were far more generous than normal redundancy provisions . 

  This was to encourage people to work through until their department moved and also so that R. S. left the impression of being a caring employer with those who chose redundancy . 

  Tables 2.1 and 2.2 give details of the relocation and redundancy provisions . 

  pp . 25-27 : table 

  How many moved 

  A very high percentage of R. S.'s professional , supervisory , skilled and semi-skilled staff moved with the company . 

  R. S. also reports that the numbers of staff leaving the company before the relocation took place were insignificant . 

  This enabled continuity to be maintained right up until the move occurred . 

  Out of the 850 people employed in London and Hertford , 150 moved to Corby . 

  The relocators included 31 out of 33 departmental managers , 18 out of 21 marketing staff , 17 out of 21 engineering staff and 14 out of 16 purchasing staff . 

  And in other administrative areas , such as personnel and accounts , most of the supervisory and long-term experienced people opted for relocation . 

  Within the company's warehousing and distribution operation , which accounts for 75 per cent of the company's employees , the majority opted to stay in London . 

  Many of these employees were women and the company was not surprised that they decided to remain in London where their husbands were working . 

  However , the two dozen or so people in these departments who did relocate had sufficient skills and experience to provide training for newcomers as the business gradually transferred . 

  Communication 

  In April 1982 , with the assistance of Hill and Knowlton ( a public relations company ) , the company began publishing a series of brochures entitled R. S. Moves to Weldon . 

  produced every two or three months , these brochures explained why the move was necessary , the amenities available in nearby towns and the R. S. relocation package . 

  R. S. ran seminars in London hotels bringing in speakers from the relocation area to discuss issues such as health , education and housing . 

  The company also organised coach parties to Weldon for all of the management staff but , due to the numbers involved , R. S. was unable to provide adequate trips for all staff and their families . 

  ( The relocation package included an element for expenditure on house hunting and fact finding trips so that staff could explore the area themselves . ) 

  As well as the company brochure , employees were given documentation on the five counties surrounding the relocation area so that they had the opportunity to get to know the areas before visiting them . 

  for each county , employees received detailed documentation on : 

  Health ( every doctor , clinic and hospital ) ; , 

  Education ( every establishment from crche to university ) ; 

  Housing ( every agent plus property sheets ) ; and 

  Local amenities ( from sports to concert halls ) . 

  R. S. used Hill and Knowlton to research the five counties and to help it produce the relocation documentation . 

  Housing 

  At the outset of the move to Weldon , house prices in the area were very depressed and people from the South East could trade up favourably . 

  Typically , a young couple with a small two-bedroomed semi in the Essex commuter belt could buy a larger three-bedroomed semi with a reasonable garden or , with a nominal increase in their mortgage , they could buy a three-bedroomed detached house . 

  However , over the period of the relocation programme , house prices rose considerably . 

  This was because so many other companies were moving into the area and the demand for property grew . 

  But , in 1984 , by the end of the relocation programme , house prices in the Corby area were still 15 per cent less than in the South East . 

  Many of R. S.'s employees were able to become first-time house buyers in the new location , whereas in London they could not have afforded property . 

  Help and advice 

  In order to help employees sell their homes and move from London , R. S. engaged the specialist relocation company , Homequity Relocation , to run a guaranteed home sale programme . 

  Under such a scheme , the relocated employees sell their property for a guaranteed price to the relocation company and so become " end of the housing chain' buyers in the new location . 

  This takes much of the uncertainty of house buying and selling off the relocated employee's shoulders . 

  Worries that the relocated employees faced were finding employment for relocated spouses and ensuring that the relocation did not affect children's schooling . 

  R. S. engaged the spouses of relocating employees in the new location when this was appropriate and publicised employment opportunities in the surrounding area . 

  The relocation process covered three summers . 

  This meant that school-children taking " O " and " A " levels were not moved during this crucial time and so disruption to schooling did not present a major problem for parents . 

  Costs 

  The costs of the relocation were as follows : land and building costs 13.5 million ; equipment and fitting out costs 1.7 million ; and the revenue cost of redundancy , relocation and other associated expenses 2.3 million . 

  These were partly offset by grants and capital allowances totalling 9.2 million . 

  The company believes its investment in Weldon to be very worthwhile although the benefits can not be so precisely quantified . 

  R. S. notes 

  The company is once more contained within one location ... 

  The new complex lends itself to mechanised materials handling ... whilst the cost of construction has been high , rental costs have been eliminated . 

  ... Staff enjoy easier journeys from the surrounding country ... . 

  Further space for expansion is on the door-step ... . 

  Suppliers find delivery to R. S. easier . 

  The company adds that it is already benefiting from increased efficiency and expects a large return on its financial investment in Weldon . 

  STC plc 

  Background 

  During 1982 and 1983 , STC plc carried out a consolidation and relocation exercise for its systems and software centre , IDEC . 

  As a result , six separate operations based in north London ( two in Cockfosters , three in Potters Bar and one in Whetstone ) and one in Orpington in Kent were relocated to Stevenage in north Hertfordshire . 

  The company , which is non-unionised , employed 298 people in the north London sites and 75 in Kent . 

  The move took place in two stages with the north London sites relocating first in 1982 and the Kent-based operation transferring to Stevenage in the summer of 1983 . 

  Because of the nature of its business , a high proportion of IDEC's work-force are professional and technical staff possessing scarce skills in software and systems design and hardware engineering . 

  In its north London sites , for example : 15 per cent of staff were professional/ technical management ; 50 per cent professional/ technical , e. g. programmers , engineers and systems analysts ; 17 per cent professional support staff such as accountants and administrators ; and 18 per cent non-professional support staff , including technical assistants , secretaries and clerks . 

  During the mid-1970s , the company decided that the consolidation of its activities on one site would produce considerable advantages . 

  Some of the most obvious included the benefits of face-to-face , and hence faster , communication between staff , together with the building of a team spirit amongst professionals of different disciplines . 

  There were , however , no suitable premises available in north London which could house the company and there were other problems associated with its existing locations . 

  The high cost of housing in the north London area was proving a barrier to the recruitment of people with the rare technical skills it required . 

  Relocation to an area which presented the right company image together with good facilities for employees could ease the problem . 

  Relocation was therefore an option . 

  But to maintain its market position as a leading systems and software house , it would need to persuade about 70 per cent of its key employees in the north London locations to relocate with the company . 

  With this in mind , in 1977 the company formed the following objectives on the relocation and consolidation of its activities : 

  " To provide a modern , high technology environment in which to consolidate company activities engaged in the development of software and systems using state-of-the-art techniques ; 

  " To eliminate , as far as possible , the high cost of housing as a barrier to recruitment in the north London locations occupied by IDEC ; and 

  " To retain as many as possible of the existing work-force during and following the move . " 

  During the period 1977 to 1980 two professional management consultancy organisations were appointed to carry out studies of suitable areas where the company might relocate . 

  North Merseyside , the West Country , the South Coast and Hertfordshire emerged as potential areas . 

  North Merseyside was dismissed immediately as existing staff would be unlikely to wish to relocate to the area and it was felt such a location would not serve to enhance the company's recruitment image . 

  The possibility of a move to the West Country or the South Coast was considered but the company was uncertain of retaining sufficient numbers of the existing work-force and these options were also dropped . 

  In contrast a site within the county of Hertfordshire was considered an ideal area for relocation since this appeared to offer the company the best opportunity to fulfil most of its objectives . 

  Hertfordshire planning authority suggested that the company direct its attentions elsewhere , possibly Bedfordshire or Milton Keynes , arguing that there was almost full employment in the county and the council was under extreme pressure from environmental groups not to permit any further industrial or commercial development . 

  However , Stevenage -- within Hertfordshire -- still had " new town " status at this time and development in the town was under the control of the Stevenage Development Corporation ( now transferred to the Commission for the New Towns ) . 

  The Corporation offered IDEC a greenfield site on the edge of the town centre which was zoned for office development . 

  IDEC felt confident that it would be able to attract a high percentage of its staff to this location as the area not only offered a pleasant environment but was only about 20 miles from north London . 

  A suitable developer was found to construct the new building . 

  As soon as the contractors moved on site in August 1980 , the company began to brief its employees on its plans . 

  Employee briefing 

  STC IDEC LIMITED has an open management style and , as a result , most employees were aware that a consolidation of activities was going to take place but that there were no suitable local premises which the company could take over . 

  Many , therefore , were expecting to be relocated . 

  When the location of the site was announced in the summer of 1980 , staff were given a provisional timetable to show when various employees might be moving . 

  The company's philosophy was to keep staff informed , on a regular basis , of progress on relocation and a monthly meeting , known as the IDEC Staff Forum , was held in which elected staff representatives met members of management to discuss areas of interest . 

  Subjects ranged from site matters to overall company strategy . 

  These forums had been held before the move was considered to provide lines of communication between management and staff but , the company notes , these meetings took on a new usefulness when the relocation was announced . 

  IDEC also employed a relocation co-ordinator between September 1980 and March 1981 to talk to each employee individually about problems they faced or might face as a result of the move . 

  The company also asked its advertising agents , Moxon , Dolphin &amp;amp; Kerby , to produce a briefing file which was issued to all employees . 

  The file contained details on : Stevenage as a place to work ; IDEC's relocation package ; the types of housing available and its cost ; education ; health ; transport ; leisure facilities ; details on the surrounding towns and villages as well as useful addresses covering Citizens' Advice Bureaux , estate agents and local newspapers . 

  The report was presented to staff at a series of meetings and an audio-visual ( tape/ slide ) presentation was made covering its key aspects . 

  The company also arranged a series of " partner " evenings so that spouses could see the presentation . 

  The company recognised that it faced a greater problem in attracting the Kent-based ( Orpington ) staff to Stevenage than it had in persuading the north London staff to move -- distance alone was an important consideration . 

  So , as part of the briefing process , Orpington employees and their families were taken on day trip coach tours to Stevenage so that they could visit the site where the new offices were being built and look at the types of houses and facilities available in the area . 

  Indeed , the company's relocation package recognised the fact that the Thames acted as a barrier to relocation for the Kent-based employees and made provision for them to make four paid visits to view accommodation . 

  Employee allowances 

  The company's policy was to offer home relocation at basically zero cost to eligible individuals . 

  Technical and professional employees , senior staff and certain other employees with key skills ( such as data control staff with operating languages , job controllers and printed circuit board layout draftsmen ) were eligible for this relocation assistance , although the allowances package was dependent on the condition that the distance between the employee's old home and Stevenage represented an increase of at least 15 miles compared with their old home to work journey . 

  North London-based staff who were not in a category entitled to home relocation allowances , or who had an additional mileage of less than 15 miles were entitled to receive additional commuting costs . 

  ( These were paid at a rate of 12p per mile with 100 per cent of the extra cost paid in the first year ; 75 per cent in the second ; 50 per cent in the third ; 25 per cent in the fourth and nothing thereafter . ) 

  All commuting costs were grossed up for tax and National Insurance deductions and paid through the payroll . 

  The company's policy with regard to the Orpington staff was to relocate the homes of entitled categories and discourage people from commuting . 

  Non-entitled categories were declared redundant unless they wished to relocate their homes to the Stevenage area at their own expense . 

  The company did make efforts to redeploy such people to jobs at other STC south London locations and IDEC reports this has been moderately successful . 

  Many of the elements which made up the relocation package applied equally to eligible staff moving from Kent and north London , for example , the payment of removal expenses , disturbance allowance and house expenses . 

  However , some of the provisions did vary according to whether the individuals were moving from one or other of the areas . 

  For instance , north London staff requiring temporary accommodation while arranging for permanent housing were given a temporary accommodation allowance for up to 13 weeks whereas those moving from Kent were able to receive this allowance for up to 26 weeks . 

  And the Kent employees were able to make four paid visits to the new area compared with the north London employees' two . 

  Further details of the relocation package are given in Table 2.3 . 

  Who moved 

  In terms of outcome the relocation of the north London operations proved to be successful with 95 per cent of the ex-north London eligible categories continuing to work in Stevenage and some 90 per cent of this group still there one year later . 

  Of the categories ineligible for home relocation assistance , 75 per cent continued to work at Stevenage after their jobs moved although many of these have now left the company . 

  IDEC has not had any particular difficulty in replacing these leavers . 

  p 35 : TABLE 

  However , the relocation of Orpington-based staff was not so successful . 

  The company managed to retain 50 per cent of the key managers and technical specialists . 

  The remaining 50 per cent were made redundant . 

  The company notes that the relocation exercise was carried out without the help of an independent specialist relocation company which may have been able to ease staffs' fears about moving to a new area and so possibly improve on the 50 per cent retention rate . 

  Costs 

  Like many others , the company found that relocation of staff is a costly procedure . 

  The budget for STC's relocation exercise was as follows : staff rehousing 520 000 ; redundancy , recruitment and training 358 000 ; temporary relocation expenses and travel allowances 110 000 ; and incentives for temporary retention of staff 55 000 . 

  The total cost of the operation was therefore in the region of 1 043 000 . 

  Source : This case study is based on Industrial Relations Review and Report , No. 348 , July 1985 . 

  AMERICAN CAN ( UK ) Ltd 

  Background 

  In April 1982 , American Can relocated its head office to Congleton in Cheshire . 

  Before the move , the head office function was split into three locations ; two of the head office buildings were in Liverpool and the company's sales function was based in Watford . 

  One of the head office buildings was originally on the company's Liverpool manufacturing site but , in April 1982 , American Can moved this office to the Congleton complex because the Liverpool head office site was , by this time , no longer in the centre of the company's operations . 

  In addition the head office buildings in Liverpool had not been purpose built to suit the needs of the company and they had become too small . 

  As a result , American Can decided that relocation could provide the answer to consolidating its head office activities and could also meet the company's need to be more centrally based in larger , more suitable accommodation . 

  The company decided that any new location had to be within reasonable travelling distance from motorway and railway networks as well as be close to an international airport . 

  American Can also looked for areas with reasonably priced rates and rent and with pleasant housing areas for staff relocating with the company . 

  Congleton was chosen because of its close proximity to Manchester airport and motorway links . 

  The site was about three hours' drive away from London and also had good communications with the north of the country . 

  Being further from Manchester than other areas often favoured by businesses , such as Wilmslow and Altrincham , Congleton offered cheaper rent and rates to the company and cheaper housing for relocating employees . 

  American Can chose to move into an existing modern building rather than build afresh . 

  The new premises were completely refurbished inside , however , in order to meet company requirements . 

  Communication 

  Before the move , the company organised visits by coach to the new area for employees and their spouses to view available housing . 

  American Can also paid travelling and accommodation expenses for employees and their families considering relocation so that they could view houses and schools by themselves . 

  Evening sessions were arranged for employees and their spouses in which the relocation package offered by the company was explained . 

  A representative from the specialist relocation company , Homequity Relocation , gave details of how the home sale programme would operate and a local builder from Congleton was invited to speak on housing opportunities in the area . 

  Relocation allowances 

  The relocation allowances package covered such items as : legal expenses ; the cost of a structural survey ; stamp duty ; estate agents' fees ; removal expenses ; the cost of two visits by the family to view accommodation ( this covered travelling and accommodation costs ) ; and a disturbance allowance of up to two months' salary . 

  ( This applied to existing employees -- new recruits asked to relocate received only one month's salary as a disturbance allowance . ) 

  Employees qualified for travel expenses while they were commuting between the old and new locations , before moving into accommodation in the new area . 

  Travel expenses were paid for a maximum of three months . 

  Employees benefited from Homequity's guaranteed home sale programme which speeded up the sale and purchase of properties in the old and new locations . 

  Who moved 

  Of the 80 to 90 staff employed in Liverpool and Watford all the 55 directors and senior managers eligible for the relocation package continued to work in the new location and of these 55 , all but three moved to Congleton . 

  These three decided to commute to and from Liverpool each day . 

  ( Liverpool is about 40 to 50 miles away from Congleton . ) 

  About half a dozen employees decided not to relocate their homes immediately at the time of the company's move south , but to relocate in the following year . 

  Two sales staff employed in the Watford office remained in that area as their clients were based in the south of the country . 

  The support staff ( approximately 30 people ) were not offered the relocation package and were made redundant . 

  The company employed new support staff in Congleton . 

  They were engaged before the relocation and given their induction training in a nearby hotel . 

  This new group was taken by coach to Liverpool before the move so that they could get to know their new managers and the methods of working before the relocation exercise . 

  BLUE CIRCLE INDUSTRIES plc 

  Background 

  Blue Circle's group headquarters began its relocation from central London to Aldermaston in Berkshire in 1983 . 

  During the late 1970s , the company found that it was becoming increasingly expensive to maintain its head office in London and therefore looked for alternative accommodation elsewhere . 

  Rather than rent a building , the company decided to build its own offices and then spent 18 months to two years looking for a suitable area . 

  The company needed access to both London's major airports ( Heathrow and Gatwick ) and to motorways . 

  Aldermaston was chosen as it met these requirements . 

  Communication 

  Staff were advised that the company was looking for a new property when the search for a new suitable area began and when Aldermaston had been identified as the place where the new offices were to be built . 

  The company then arranged coach trips for employees and their spouses to view the area . 

  Open days were held at Aldermaston to provide information on the town and the facilities available there . 

  Blue Circle engaged Black Horse Relocation , a specialist relocation company , to carry out " staff clinics " during which staff could discuss their questions and problems with members of Black Horse and Blue Circle staff . 

  Relocation allowances 

  The relocation out of London led Blue Circle to revise , improve and formalise its existing relocation policy . 

  The resulting package included the reimbursement of such items as : estate agents' , legal and survey fees ; removal expenses ; and the cost of new school uniforms . 

  The company also paid 50 per cent of the cost towards new curtains and carpets up to a maximum of 1500 free of tax . 

  When employees are asked , as in this case , to relocate as part of an office move they also receive 1500 paid through the payroll ( and hence subject to tax ) as a compensatory disturbance payment . 

  The company also paid travelling expenses for all employees following the move of their department for a six-month period . 

  Employees were able to take advantage of Black Horse Relocation's guaranteed home sale programme to sell their old properties quickly and purchase houses in the new area . 

  Blue Circle offered interest-free loans to a maximum of 10 000 over 15 years to those suffering as a result of a disparity in house prices . 

  Any assistance given was based on a survey of house prices carried out by Black Horse Relocation . 

  Who moved 

  The central London head office originally employed 400 people . 

  When the relocation was announced in 1983 , Blue Circle expected that around 30 per cent of the work-force would not move with the company . 

  By the middle of 1984 , however , the company's prediction had changed and it anticipated losing 50 per cent of its staff . 

  Many of the support staff , especially clerical workers , found other jobs in London and many of the company's married women employees opted to take redundancy rather than relocate as their husband's employment was in the London area . 

  Those choosing to take redundancy received the company's standard redundancy provisions as agreed with the British Cement Staff Association . 

  The relocation itself was phased with departments relocating separately to the new location . 

  Employees with school-age children were allowed to buy property in the new area but not move until the end of that school year . 

  Apart from a few small departments which relocated to Aldermaston into temporary accommodation shortly after the site was purchased , the main move was made in two parts starting with the move of the headquarters of Blue Circle Cement , the main UK operating group , into temporary accommodation in the third quarter of 1984 . 

  With the completion of the new office block the whole of the operation relocated there in September/ October 1985 . 

  SUN LIFE ASSURANCE 

  Background 

  Sun Life Assurance employs 2500 employees and in 1976 the head office was relocated from London to Bristol . 

  The main reason why the company decided to undertake a relocation exercise was because of cost : rent , rates and overheads were a lot less in Bristol than in London . 

  Sun Life decided that Bristol was ideal for a number of reasons . 

  First , it had excellent road and rail communication with London and the rest of the country . 

  It also provided a large catchment area for high quality recruitment . 

  Its housing , shopping , school and medical facilities were considered to be excellent and so very attractive to the London-based staff . 

  It also offered many social and cultural activities as well as easy access to Wales and the South Western holiday resorts . 

  Property was also cheaper in Bristol than in London and so staff did not have to pay increased housing costs . 

  Sun Life did not know before the move how many employees would choose to relocate from London to Bristol although , at the end of the exercise ( which was phased to ease potential business problems ) , 500 staff moved with the company . 

  Communication 

  Sun Life appointed a relocation officer at executive level who reported directly to the company's general manager . 

  The relocation officer held departmental meetings during which every aspect of the move was discussed and employees' questions were answered . 

  After these meetings , every employee was interviewed by a member of the team dealing with the relocation so they could raise any questions that they had . 

  Staff were asked at this time to complete a form indicating whether or not they wished to relocate . 

  As part of the employee briefing on the move , the company arranged week-end coach trips to Bristol for employees and their families to view housing and facilities in the area . 

  The company provided accommodation for those taking advantage of the week-end visits . 

  Second relocation exercise 

  At the time that Sun Life moved its head office to Bristol , it also had nine regional offices based in major cities . 

  The head office was responsible for company administration and the regional offices dealt with administration for the firm's 40 sales outlets . 

  However , by the early 1980s , the sales outlets had become linked to the head office via computer networks . 

  The types of contracts being marketed had changed too and required faster administration . 

  These two factors led Sun Life to review the role of its regional offices . 

  The company made an announcement in April 1983 that it would be closing eight of the nine regional offices ( leaving one in London ) . 

  All staff in these offices were offered the opportunity to go to Bristol to work at the head office . 

  Some staff were offered employment in the sales offices which were geographically closest to their regional office . 

  The closure of the regional offices was phased over an 18-month period and affected 435 staff . 

  Of these , 185 remained in employment in pensions offices and sales branches , 120 were lost through natural wastage and 90 opted for redundancy . 

  Forty staff chose to relocate to the Bristol area and continued their employment with Sun Life in the head office . 

  Relocation allowances 

  Staff relocating with Sun Life received the cost of : legal and estate agents' fees for the sale of the old property plus the legal fees , stamp duty and surveyors' fees paid in respect of the new property . 

  The company also paid for one week's hotel accommodation for the employee and spouse to house hunt in the new location . 

  On moving house , Sun Life paid for employees and their families , travel expenses , removal expenses plus any storage charges for up to 13 weeks . 

  Employees also received a grant towards incidental expenses like buying carpets and curtains and paying for telephone installation . 

  The grant varied according to the employee's grade . 

  Sun Life also paid an allowance towards the cost of new school uniforms . 

  A taxable disturbance allowance was given to existing home owners . 

  The amount paid depended on each employee's grade . 

  Sun Life helped employees with bridging finance when this was necessary . 

  Loans were generally for six months and were interest-free . 

  If employees had to move into temporary accommodation while trying to find new housing , they received a tax-free allowance towards the cost of this accommodation for a maximum period of 13 weeks . 

  The allowance varied according to their grade . 

  Relocation Allowances 

  Organisations' relocation policies vary widely in their content . 

  Reimbursement of the costs incurred by employees moving at company request is common to the majority of relocation policies -- be they drawn up by small or large employers . 

  These include the payment of fees incurred in buying and selling houses and removal charges . 

  If a transfer to a new job does not justify moving house employees generally receive help with increased travelling costs . 

  At the other end of the scale are major organisations which regularly move staff around the country . 

  They have well-defined written policies providing relocation assistance covering : house expenses incurred ( legal and estate agents' fees , surveys , land registry fees , stamp duty , etc. ) ; house-hunting expenses ( travel and accommodation costs ) ; house-moving expenses ( removal , storage and insurance charges , travel expenses and hotel accommodation costs during the move ) ; and financial assistance with the cost of temporary accommodation . 

  Employers also usually give a disturbance allowance , pay for bridging loans or use the services of a specialist relocation company to dispose of the employees' old homes . 

  And they may provide financial help towards the cost of an increased mortgage resulting from a move from an area of low cost housing to one where prices are considerably higher . 

  Some major organisations give staff additional compensation for moving . 

  In the banking and insurance sector , for instance , some employers give taxable transfer grants on top of the non-taxable disturbance allowances . 

  Firms can help in other ways too , such as by providing company housing for employees who are unable to find property in the new area before the date of their transfer . 

  Firms do not have to have a written relocation policy ; although there are obvious advantages if they do . 

  For example , employees know where they stand with regard to compensation for moving at company request ; a clear policy aids employee relations . 

  The levels of relocation allowances paid will change over time with employers usually reviewing their cash values each year . 

  ( The data given in this chapter was collected during the first six months of 1985 and employers should , therefore , bear this in mind when determining their relocation policies . ) 

  Relocation allowances and benefits may be determined through negotiation between the employing organisation and the recognised trade unions or staff association . 

  However , the contents of a relocation package are not , in the main , considered to be a negotiable item by most employers . 

  They tend to review their arrangements -- perhaps in consultation with their unions -- so that allowances remain within Inland Revenue limits ( to ensure employees do not pay tax on them ) and so they provide adequate compensation for any costs incurred and the domestic upheaval involved in moving . 

  Relocation allowances for existing staff should not be reviewed as bonuses but as compensatory payments which enable employees to make decisions about their futures within their companies without worrying about financial pressures . 

  To illustrate the wide variety of allowances and benefits contained within relocation policies , this chapter gives some examples from named firms . 

  The full texts of eight relocation policies from named companies are given as examples of good practice in Appendix 1 . 

  The first part of this chapter covers relocation provisions for existing individual staff transferred at company request . 

  A section at the end looks at relocation allowances offered to new recruits who have to move to take up an appointment . 

  ALLOWANCES FOR EXISTING INDIVIDUALS TRANSFERRED AT COMPANY REQUEST 

  Costs associated with buying and selling property 

  The direct costs incurred by employees who are buying and selling property are usually reimbursed in full by employers . 

  These costs include : 

  Estate agents' fees ; 

  Solicitors' fees ; 

  Stamp duty ; 

  Land registry fees ; 

  Local searches ; 

  Survey charges ( usually building society survey fees or , sometimes , private surveys ) ; 

  Advertising or auctioneer's charges ( if estate agents are not used ) ; 

  Architects' fees ; 

  Accommodation bureau fees ; 

  Mortgage cancellation fees ; 

  Insurance cover , rates and utility charges on property not yet sold ( if the employee has already moved to the new location ) . 

  Some companies also reimburse costs incurred through premature termination of contracts for leased or rented housing as a result of the relocation . 

  Firms may also make provision for bridging loans or provide temporary mortgage facilities . 

  Merrill Lynch Relocation Management International's Second Annual Study Of Employee Relocation Policies Among Major UK Companies covers the relocation provisions of 303 of " The Times Top 1000 companies " . 

  The study found that 89 per cent of all companies interviewed provide assistance for an employee buying a home in the new location . 

  Of those 271 firms which do provide assistance , Merrill Lynch found that 83 per cent pay for legal expenses and land charges/ stamp duty . 

  Other forms of assistance included reimbursement of : survey costs ( 30 per cent ) , house hunting expenses ( 30 per cent ) and removals ( 28 per cent ) . 

  Table 3.1 gives full details of the survey's findings . 

  Limits on reimbursement 

  Although employers generally reimburse the direct costs of buying and selling property , there are some firms which place limits on this . 

  For example , Brown &amp;amp; Root pays for estate agents' fees and legal charges up to a maximum of three months' gross salary . 

  Company policy may also specify a limit as to the number of surveys that may be carried out at company expense . 

  The Rank Organisation , for example , pays for two and Nabisco pays for up to three building society surveys . 

  Abortive purchases 

  Some firms make special provision for abortive house purchases . 

  In Nabisco's policy legal fees resulting from up to two unsuccessful attempts to purchase a house are refunded . 

  And at VAG , if a house purchase falls through , further survey fees ( in addition to the one building society and one private survey already carried out ) may be reimbursed with the prior approval of the personnel manager . 

  p 47 : TABLE 

  Provision for people living in rented accommodation 

  Employees moving from rented accommodation to buying their homes may also receive some of or all the direct costs of buying property . 

  For instance , at Hambro Life Assurance , employees receive the costs of legal and any other fees incurred in buying property for the first time . 

  At VAG , employees leaving rented property and buying their own house receive 50 per cent of the costs of all normal legal fees , stamp duty , mortgage guarantee premium and building society legal fees . 

  Those VAG employees who decide to continue living in rented private accommodation receive reimbursement of legal fees incurred in drawing up the lease . 

  HOUSE HUNTING 

  Provision for house hunting varies widely between organisations . 

  Organisations may pay for just the employee and spouse to view accommodation or may make provision for children to go too . 

  Employees may be given time off for house hunting or may be expected to do this at weekends . 

  There may be fixed allowances payable for accommodation and meals or firms may reimburse reasonable expenses . 

  In general , two or three house hunting visits are allowed by most firms and around three to six days are usually considered to be adequate time to find housing . 

  House hunting allowances can vary according to employees' marital circumstances ( for example at Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance ) or according to the distance involved in the relocation ( for instance at Pilkingtons ) . 

  Table 3.2 gives details of house hunting 

  p 49 : TABLE 

  TEMPORARY ACCOMMODATION ALLOWANCES 

  If an employee has not found a permanent home in the new location at the time of the transfer , it is usual for the employer to pay the costs of a hotel stay and travel expenses home at week-ends . 

  If the old property has been sold but the employee has yet to complete buying the new , hotel and meal expenses may be payable for the employee and family in the new location . 

  Employers generally fix a time limit on the payment of these allowances . 

  Table 3.3 gives seven examples of company practice . 

  Merrill Lynch's 1985 survey of relocation policies found that 96 per cent of the " 303 Times Top 1000 companies " interviewed compensated their employees for the costs of living in temporary accommodation , with 78 per cent compensating for hotel and/ or rented accommodation for a fixed period , generally for up to three months . 

  Company housing 

  Some organisations have company housing which may be used by employees who are transferred to the new area but have yet to complete their house purchases there . 

  For instance , Pilkingtons has company-owned licensed residential premises in St Helens , and employees yet to find permanent housing in the area may , whenever practicable , use these . 

  The company pays for board and accommodation . 

  When employees are accompanied by their families , they may be able to use company housing at Pilkingtons' expense but employees are entirely responsible for lighting , heating and the maintenance of their families . 

  REMOVALS 

  Company relocation policies generally cover the cost of the removal of household goods to the new location . 

  They may also cover the costs of insurance of personal effects in transit , storage charges and travel and hotel accommodation costs for employees and their families during the move . 

  Some firms grant special leave at the time of the move . 

  Removal costs 

  Although practically all firms pay removal costs , a number require employees to submit quotes , and usually reimbursement is based on the cost of the lowest quote . 

  ( Employees may opt for the higher quote but can expect to pay the difference themselves . ) 

  In general , organisations ask for two quotes although some ask for three . 

  Some organisations specify particular items which are not covered by the reimbursement of removal costs policy . 

  For instance , the BBC's policy states : " the reasonable cost of the removal of household goods , excluding domestic animals and such items as motor vehicles , outbuildings , boats , etc. will be reimbursed " . 

  Policies may cater for the do-it-yourself enthusiast . 

  VAG's policy states that " if you wish to do the [ removal ] job yourself then the company will meet the costs of van hire and petrol expenses " . 

  Gratuities may be refunded . 

  The BBC reimburses tips up to 50p per man and Cadbury Schweppes pays gratuities up to 10 per cent of the removal charge . 

  STORAGE AND INSURANCE 

  Relocation policies may make provision for the payment of storage charges , for instance at Cadbury Schweppes and VAG . 

  Typically organisations require employees to obtain two or three estimates and base their payment on the lowest one . 

  Time limits may be set on how long employees can leave their goods in storage and receive reimbursement from their employers . 

  Storage costs are paid for a maximum period of 12 months in local authorities , six months at Nabisco and three months at Pilkingtons . 

  The insurance cost of household goods in transit or in storage , as appropriate , is also included in most policies . 

  TRAVEL AND HOTEL COSTS 

  It is usual for companies to reimburse travel costs incurred by the employee and immediate family during the move . 

  for instance , the costs of travelling by rail or by car are refunded by Pilkingtons , Billiton and local authorities . 

  Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance pays the cost of second class rail fares . 

  If the relocation means that the employee and family have to stay in a hotel , accommodation costs for one or two nights are generally reimbursed . 

  SPECIAL LEAVE 

  At VAG and Associated British Ports , employees are given two days' special leave at the time of the move . 

  Employees at Henry Sykes and Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance have three days' special leave . 

  At Pilkingtons , the amount of leave given depends on the distance over which employees are relocating . 

  Those moving under 100 miles may take one day off work ; those moving over 100 miles receive two days . 

  In addition , employees may be granted up to a maximum of three days' special leave . 

  SCHOOL FEES/ SCHOOL UNIFORMS 

  It is usual for relocation policies to pay a grant towards the costs associated with the education of employees' children . 

  Prudential Assurance , for example , pays a tax-free allowance of 77 per child towards the cost of replacing school uniforms . 

  Sun Life Assurance pays 110 per child for those of primary school age and 150 per child for those in secondary education to help cover new uniform costs . 

  Pilkingtons pays a grant of 50 for any child attending school full-time . 

  Any non-refundable school fees which have been paid by the employee are reimbursed ( less any Family Education Scheme entitlements ) on production of receipts . 

  Brown &amp;amp; Root's policy takes into account relocation during term-time . 

  It says : 

  if relocation takes place during a school term , the company will reimburse day school fees for the remainder of that term or for such periods as required by the school for pupil removal . 

  If the relocation takes place at a time when it is important for a child to complete a course of education , e. g. GCE examinations , the company will pay reasonable board and lodging costs for the child up to a maximum of 200 per month for the remainder of that school term or until all examinations are complete within that academic year . 

  Board and lodging costs are not paid during the school holidays . 

  DISTURBANCE ALLOWANCES 

  Company relocation policies usually provide for the payment of a disturbance allowance . 

  Such allowances are paid to employees to partly offset the expense of moving home . 

  They aim to cover the cost , for example , of cleaning and refitting or replacing carpets and other soft furnishings , transferring the telephone , disconnecting/ reconnecting gas and electricity supplies , re-plumbing washing machines and the cost of re-decorating and/ or buying decorating materials . 

  They also cover the cost of obtaining new appliances such as cookers if the move necessitates a change from electricity to gas or vice versa . 

  Although organisations recognise that employees may not always be able to refit old carpets or curtains in the new property , policies do often include a statement to the effect that staff should make every effort to adapt their existing possessions rather than buy afresh . 

  Some organisations provide detailed lists of items which are allowable under the disturbance allowance ; others merely state that it is intended to meet all other " out-of-pocket " expenses incurred during relocation which are not specified elsewhere in the company's policy . 

  Level of payment 

  The levels of disturbance allowance given vary widely from organisation to organisation . 

  Table 3.4 gives examples of disturbance allowances paid in 14 organisations . 

  In the main , disturbance allowances range from 10 to 12 per cent of salary with maximum payments usually between 1000 and 1700 . 

  However , as Table 3.4 shows , there is a great deal of variety in not only the amount of money given but also in the factors which are taken into account in its calculation . 

  Employees may , for example , receive flat-rate payments , allowances based on a percentage of their salary , or a payment based on a number of weeks' salary . 

  Maximum and/ or minimum levels of payment may be fixed or employees may receive an allowance according to the higher of two different figures : a percentage of salary or a flat-rate payment . 

  Around three-quarters ( 78 per cent ) of the " 303 Times Top 1000 companies interviewed in Merrill Lynch's 1985 relocation survey paid disturbance allowances . 

  In over half the companies , the amount was related to the transferee's salary . 

  In only 11 per cent of companies was a fixed amount paid . 

  Definition of salary 

  When a disturbance allowance is paid as a percentage of salary , an organisation's relocation policy generally spells out exactly what constitutes the salary . 

  For example , at Cadbury Schweppes the disturbance allowance is 12 per cent of annual remuneration . 

  Company policy states : " Annual remuneration is defined as the employee's basic salary as a result of the move . 

  London weighting and/ or any other allowance will not be included " . 

  At Nabisco , the disturbance allowance paid is 12 per cent of annual remuneration which is defined as " the employee's basic salary ( including any shift allowance ) as a result of the move ( any bonus/ commission payable will not be included ) " . 

  When an employee's relocation is the result of a promotion or when an employee receives an increase in salary at the new location , any disturbance allowance payable on the basis of a percentage of salary is usually calculated on the new salary . 

  FACTORS AFFECTING THE LEVEL OF PAYMENTS 

  The level of disturbance allowances may vary according to employees' marital and domestic circumstances , their grade and/ or whether their relocation results in a salary increase . 

  Marital status 

  A number of relocation policies take account of marital status in respect of disturbance allowances . 

  Married employees may not , under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 , receive less favourable treatment than single employees and thus may not receive lower allowances than those given to single staff . 

  But they may , however , receive higher payments . 

  Recognising that relocation may have a worse effect on married staff than on single workers , it is not unusual to find that they receive higher allowances . 

  This is the case , for example , at Henry Sykes . 

  Disturbance allowances may also be higher for those with dependants , for example at the Yorkshire Bank ( see Table 3.4 ) . 

  Type of accommodation 

  The level of disturbance payment given can also vary according to employees' domestic circumstances taking into account , for example , moves from unfurnished or furnished rented property to new rented accommodation or moves from rented property to purchased housing . 

  For instance , BBC staff who sell their own house at the old location and buy another property at the new location receive a grant of 1094 to cover the cost of miscellaneous expenses . 

  Similarly a grant is paid to staff who move from a rented unfurnished house or flat to a similar property at the new base or who buy a house of their own at the new location . 

  Employees moving from an unfurnished flatlet or room to similar accommodation at the new base or who rent or buy a house at the new location receive a grant of 438 . 

  The same payment is given to staff who lived in furnished accommodation at the previous base who move to rented unfurnished property at the new base or who buy their own houses in the new area . 

  Staff moving from furnished accommodation to similar accommodation in the new location receive a grant of 66 . 

  VAG's settling-in allowance for employees moving to or from furnished accommodation is 5 per cent of salary subject to a maximum of 830 . 

  This compares with a disturbance allowance of 12 per cent of salary subject to a maximum of 1660 for home-owners . 

  Nabisco's employees who move from rented accommodation receive a disturbance allowance which is limited to a refund of specific items of expenditure against receipts rather than the 12 per cent of salary paid as a disturbance allowance to home-owners . 

  Employees moving from rented homes have to discuss their list of intended purchases and prices with the personnel manager before buying them . 

  Grade 

  Disturbance allowances may vary with employees' grades . 

  Sun Life Assurance has 10 different levels of disturbance allowance which range from 660 for those in the lowest grade to 1715 for those at the top . 

  Salary rise 

  At Cadbury Schweppes employees who do not receive an increase in their salaries as a result of relocation , receive an allowance of 10 per cent of their annual remuneration in addition to their disturbance allowance . 

  Proceeds of house sale 

  At the Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance employees receive 10 per cent of their gross basic salary as a disturbance allowance ( subject to minimum and maximum payments as agreed with its Inspector at the Inland Revenue ) . 

  In addition , employees with company mortgages may keep up to 1300 of the proceeds of the sale of their property when they move at the company's request . 

  Disturbance payments covering children 

  Payments given to employees who have to replace children's school uniforms or pay subsistence costs so that children can continue their education in the old location are usually listed separately from disturbance allowances in company relocation policies . 

  However , some organisations specify that the disturbance allowance covers such items . 

  For example , at Nabisco the allowance is intended to cover the costs of new school uniforms . 

  Employees also receive a payment of 150 for each dependent child under 18 ( although children aged 16-18 must be in full-time education for employees to qualify for this payment ) . 

  REMOVAL GRANTS 

  Some organisations not only pay disturbance allowances but provide removal grants as well . 

  This is a way of giving employees more cash as an incentive to move and is particularly common in the banking sector . 

  At Lloyds Bank married staff receive a taxable disturbance allowance of 15 per cent of salary ( subject to a minimum payment of 1125 and a maximum of 1980 ) . 

  Single staff receive 10 per cent of salary ( subject to a 565 minimum and a 990 maximum payment ) . 

  Managers also receive a removal grant of 1290 and other staff receive 1135 . 

  These payments are tax-free provided that they cover such " essential purchases " as : new carpets and curtains when essential ; light fittings , new cooking or heating appliances where there has been a change of power ; and redecoration costs . 

  In essence , such removal grants cover similar items to those usually included under the heading disturbance allowance . 

  Removal grants or disturbance allowances may be paid tax-free under " Extra Statutory Concession A5 " ( see Chapter 6 ) . 

  Additional grants 

  Companies such as Brown &amp;amp; Root and Cornhill Insurance pay relocated employees other grants on top of the disturbance allowance . 

  Brown &amp;amp; Root gives an additional housing assistance grant and Cornhill Insurance gives an extra transfer allowance . 

  Additional payments 

  Under some company policies , all domestic expenses which result from relocation are covered by the payment of a disturbance allowance . 

  This is the case , for example , at SKF and Nabisco . 

  However , others pay the costs of certain domestic expenses on top . 

  Pilkingtons pays a " resettlement allowance " at a rate of 12 per cent of salary at the date of transfer . 

  It also pays for telephone installation in the new house ( provided the employee was already a telephone subscriber ) and 50 per cent of expenses incurred in changing carpets and curtains , against bills , up to a maximum of 500 . 

  Prudential Assurance's policy treats items such as the installation of a telephone and television aerials where they existed in the old house but not in the new and the reconnection of electrical/ gas appliances as separate items . 

  Employees receive reimbursement of such costs on the production of full details and receipted bills . 

  Prudential Assurance pays 1406 as a non-taxable allowance towards incidental expenses . 

  ( Single staff who are first-time buyers or who are renting accommodation receive 703 . ) 

  VAT RETURNS 

  A number of organisations require employees to submit receipts and VAT invoices so that they may reclaim the VAT paid as a business expense . 

  Not all companies are registered for VAT purposes and VAT may not be reclaimed on all relocation expenses . 

  However , HM Customs and Excise has ruled that VAT may , for example , be reclaimed on : removal expenses including storage charges , estate agents' fees , legal and surveyors' fees and hotel and restaurant bills . 

  Some firms , such as Prudential Assurance , insist that employees indicate that payment is made on behalf of the company . 

  Prudential's relocation policy states that : 

  To recover this tax ( VAT ) it is essential that any invoices or bills which exceed 50 indicate that payment is made on behalf of " The Prudential Assurance Company Limited " and show separately the amount of VAT included in the gross total . 

  The name and address and VAT registration number of the payee must of course appear on all invoices/ receipts . 

  TAXATION 

  The taxation of disturbance allowances is a particularly thorny issue . 

  To be given tax free , such allowances must be seen by the Inland Revenue as being reasonable in amount and properly controlled . 

  Company relocation policies generally provide tax-free disturbance allowances and employees are therefore usually asked to keep appropriate receipts to give to the Inland Revenue or their employers . 

  However , in other companies , disturbance allowances given to relocated employees are taxable . 

  ( See Chapter 6 for further details . ) 

  The disturbance grant paid to employees at Norwich Union Insurance Group is made up of two elements ; one part taxable , the other non-taxable . 

  Those employees buying and selling houses receive the following payments : branch managers , 1690 non-taxable plus 1105 taxable ; assistant managers , 1650 non-taxable plus 560 taxable ; and other field staff , 1450 non-taxable and 195 taxable . 

  Those staff not buying or selling houses but who are changing their place of residence receive one payment of 335 which is not taxed . 

  The non-taxable allowance payments , as approved by the Inland Revenue , are paid by cheque , the taxable payments are given with salaries . 

  When transfer payments are given in addition to a disturbance allowance , these are usually taxed . 

  Brown &amp;amp; Root's disturbance allowance is normally treated as tax-free , but the payment of the additional housing assistance grant is subject to the deduction of income tax through PAYE . 

  Similarly , at Cornhill Insurance , the transfer allowance is taxable . 

  And at Cadbury Schweppes , the additional allowance , paid to employees who do not receive salary increases as a result of their transfer , is taxable . 

  Removal grants and disturbance allowances both refund employees for out-of-pocket expenses incurred as a result of moving home . 

  Whatever terminology is used , the Inland Revenue does not allow tax-free treatment twice over : the disturbance allowance and any additional grants or allowances are taxable above a certain maximum payment . 

  WHEN PAYMENT IS MADE 

  Practice varies as to when employees receive payment of their disturbance allowances . 

  For instance , at Prudential Assurance , the taxable disturbance allowance of 1724 is paid in two equal instalments ; employees receive one payment of 862 at the time of their transfer and the balance one year later . 

  Payment of the disturbance allowance at the Yorkshire Bank is also made in two equal instalments ; one is given on the first available salary pay day after the move to the new house , the other is paid when the bank receives the proceeds of the sale of the employee's old house . 

  At SKF , the disturbance allowance is paid one month after the transfer has been agreed by the employee , while at Brown &amp;amp; Root , employees receive their disturbance allowance and housing assistance grant on completion of their move . 

  Employees at VAG receive their " settling-in allowance " four weeks before the completion of the purchase of the new accommodation . 

  Cornhill Insurance's relocation policy states that the disturbance allowance " is payable upon removal but in no circumstances prior to removal actually taking place " . 

  The taxable transfer allowance , paid in addition to the disturbance allowance , is made in two stages ; half is paid to the employee with the first month's salary in the new position and the remainder paid with the twelfth month's salary in the new position . 

  BRIDGING LOANS 

  Bridging finance is a major concern for both employers and employees . 

  If employees are unable to sell their old properties at the same time as they commit themselves to buying a new one , they may need finance in the form of a bridging loan . 

  However , at current high interest rates , many employees can not afford to pay the interest on expensive bridging loans . 

  As a result , a number of employers are prepared to pay for interest-free loans . 

  For example , bridging loans are given , free of interest , for three months at Henry Sykes , Billiton , Cadbury Schweppes and Pilkingtons and for six months at Brown &amp;amp; Root , Boots ( retail division ) and Cornhill Insurance . 

  The employer may have a problem if the employee has not managed to sell the old property at the end of this time . 

  The employer may have to extend the period of the loan , thus incurring further interest charges or start charging the employee interest . 

  If companies do decide to charge the employee interest , the rate is usually bankers' base rate plus a percentage such as 1 per cent ( at Cadbury Schweppes ) or 1 per cent ( at Pilkingtons ) . 

  At Boots ( retail division ) , however , if employees' bridging loans extend beyond six months , they may be charged the current building society interest rate -- usually a higher rate . 

  Rather than run the risk of financing lengthy bridging loans , employers are turning increasingly to specialist relocation companies which , through guaranteed home sale schemes , reduce the length of time necessary to sell an employee's old property . 

  Merrill Lynch's 1985 relocation study found that 44 per cent of the " 303 Times Top 1000 companies " interviewed provided bridging finance directly . 

  One in four gave no assistance with bridging finance and the remainder reimbursed employees for bank loan interest . 

  Merrill Lynch found that " one in five companies who provide assistance with bridging finance do not set a time limit , 28 per cent provide assistance for up to three months and 41 per cent for four to six months " . 

  The survey also contains information on the action employers take on the expiry of the time limit . 

  It found that 28 per cent would extend the time limit indefinitely , 8 per cent would extend it for another six months and 5 per cent for a further year . 

  About one-third would take no action at all : 21 per cent said they would be flexible according to individual's circumstances , 5 per cent would continue to review the situation and 5 per cent would take no action if the employee acted reasonably . 

  Merrill Lynch found only a minority of companies would take a tough line -- only one in seven firms would start to charge the current rate of interest and one in six would apply pressure on the employee to reduce the price of the old house in order to sell it . 

  HOUSE PURCHASE SCHEMES 

  Employees working in the banking , finance and insurance sector often benefit , subject to eligibility criteria , from subsidised mortgages . 

  Under house purchase schemes employees can buy property at concessionary rates of interest , often around 5 per cent . 

  In the main , staff have to complete a qualifying period of service ( often two or three years ) before they qualify for this . 

  However , in some organisations , particularly senior staff can benefit from staff mortgages soon after their appointment . 

  At Sun Life Assurance Society professionally qualified staff such as chartered accountants and investment analysts become eligible for a staff mortgage at a preferential interest rate on completing a six-month probationary period . 

  Mortgages at preferential interest rates may be offered to employees asked to move at company request with eligibility criteria ( such as age , service and marital status ) waived or reduced . 

  MOVES FROM LOW-COST TO HIGH-COST AREAS 

  The need to move employees from areas of low-cost housing to higher priced areas presents a special problem to an organisation . 

  Employees may wish to accept a transfer to another area but can not afford to do so . 

  To help them , firms usually offer some form of financial assistance . 

  This is termed " excess mortgage allowance " , " excess housing allowance " , " excess rent allowance " or " excess cost allowance , . 

  Determining housing differentials 

  Employers may employ their own valuers to determine house prices in different areas to assess payments under an excess mortgage allowance scheme . 

  Alternatively , they may employ an independent third party , such as a relocation company , to undertake this task . 

  EXCESS MORTGAGE ALLOWANCE SCHEMES . 

  The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority's excess rent allowance operates over a nine-year period . 

  Employees relocating to London receive a maximum allowance of 871 a year and those moving to areas of higher priced housing elsewhere in the country receive the current maximum payment of 638 per year . 

  Employees who are householders receive this allowance , paid over nine years , on a reducing basis of one-fifth of the original amount over the last four years . 

  Single employees who do not own property receive an allowance at a lower rate , paid for just one year . 

  However , many excess mortgage allowance schemes run for a shorter time , for instance , for five or seven years . 

  Under one company scheme -- which works on the basis that the employee moves into an area of higher cost housing but into a similar property -- the company pays half the additional mortgage cost for the first two years from the date of the move . 

  After the second year , the allowance is reduced by one-sixth and that figure is deducted from the allowance each year , so that it reaches zero after seven years . 

  The allowance is paid monthly , free of tax . 

  The individual has to put all proceeds from the sale of the old house into buying the new one . 

  If the transferred employee insists on moving into bigger or more " up market " accommodation , the excess mortgage allowance is based on the price of housing comparable with that owned in the old area . 

  Cadbury Schweppes' mortgage assistance scheme provides for an allowance , tax free , based on the Building Societies' Association recommended basic mortgage interest rate on the agreed difference in price between the properties in the old and new areas . 

  ( The size and amenities of the new property compared with the old is taken into consideration . ) 

  The allowance fluctuates with changes in the basic mortgage interest rate . 

  The allowance is paid in full for three years and is then reduced progressively by 12 per cent per annum of the original difference over the subsequent seven years . 

  It is paid free of tax up to a maximum of 8000 over the full period of the allowance ( see Appendix 1 ) . 

  Boots ( retail division ) may consider giving employees moving from low-cost to high-cost areas a loan of up to a maximum of one and a half times the employee's expected first year's gross salary . 

  The first 2000 of this loan is subject to interest charged at the Abbey National Building Society's current rate , changing as the rate varies . 

  Interest is not charged during the employee's first two years of ownership . 

  Pilkingtons has two " special loan " schemes , one covering moves to London , the other moves elsewhere in the country . 

  The company's policy is given in full in Appendix 1 . 

  Merrill Lynch's 1985 survey on relocation policies found that 98 of the " 303 Times Top 1000 companies " interviewed ( 41 per cent ) had a policy which gives mortgage compensation when employees move from low-cost to high-cost areas and 18 per cent provided subsidised loans or cheap mortgages . 

  Table 3.5 gives details . 

  Mortgage allowance scheme at Nabisco 

  Employees required by the company to move house to a part of the country where housing is more expensive will qualify for the mortgage allowance scheme . 

  If employees move to a part of the country where house prices are comparable or lower then the mortgage allowance scheme will not apply . 

  The mortgage allowance will be based on the difference between the selling price of the existing house and the lower of the purchase price of the new house or the estimated price of an equivalent new house . 

  An independent valuation of the estimated purchase price of the existing house in the new location will be carried out . 

  If both the company and employee are happy with this valuation the mortgage allowance will be based on it . 

  If one party does not wish to accept this valuation a second will be obtained . 

  If the first and second valuation are within 15 per cent of each other an average will be taken of the two . 

  If they are not within 15 per cent of each other a third valuation will be obtained and the average taken of the two closest valuations from all three . 

  A list of companies who carry out these disparity valuations is held by the personnel manager . 

  The company will pay the valuation fee in all cases . 

  This calculation will be made on the basis of a broadly equivalent comparable house , that is , one which would broadly provide the same accommodation , due allowance being made for the location , for example , urban versus rural and which is in a location of broadly equivalent quality . 

  Employees who are not at present house-owners may be entitled to a mortgage allowance in certain exceptional circumstances . 

  If payable it will be assessed on the difference between the purchase price of the new house if this is of an appropriate category and the estimated ( lower ) price they would have paid in their existing location for a broadly equivalent house . 

  p 66 : TABLE 

  Any mortgage increase undertaken for personal reasons ( for example , to obtain capital , maximise tax allowances ) or purely as a result of purchasing a larger or more desirable property will not qualify for assistance . 

  In addition all the free proceeds of sale must be committed towards the purchase price . 

  The allowance will be based on a payment of 100 for each 1000 of agreed house price difference . 

  It will be paid in full for a period of three years and will then be reduced by one-third each year over the subsequent three years . 

  It will be extinguished therefore at the end of the fifth year . 

  An application for the allowance should be made on the mortgage allowance claim form . 

  Payment , when approved , is effective from the date of the new mortgage . 

  Details of the allowance will not normally be included in a letter confirming salary to a building society . 

  Payment of the mortgage allowance will be through the normal salaries system on a monthly/ four-weekly basis and will be non-taxable , provided that the Inland Revenue is satisfied that the payments made are reasonable in amount . 

  Any payments above a reasonable level will be taxed . 

  Full details of the payments made must be supplied to the Inland Revenue to meet its requirements . 

  If an employee leaves the company for any reason whatsoever , the mortgage allowance will cease immediately . 

  If an employee should retransfer to an area of lower housing costs , payment of the allowance will be reviewed . 

  Taxation 

  Excess mortgage allowance schemes which have the approval of the Inspector of Taxes may provide tax-free payments to employees under the Inland Revenue's Statement of Practice ( see Chapter 6 ) . 

  PROTECTION AGAINST FINANCIAL LOSS 

  Relocation policies may include provision to protect or cushion employees against financial loss when they sell their old properties and buy elsewhere . 

  for instance , the BBC gives a fixed mortgage interest allowance . 

  Under this scheme , when a member of staff has to surrender a mortgage at a low fixed rate of interest for a new mortgage at a higher rate of interest , a compensatory allowance may be payable . 

  This is paid over the outstanding period of the original loan or any shorter period that the new loan might involve . 

  And at Pilkingtons , if employees are paying a fixed rate of interest on their old mortgage and can not obtain such favourable terms on a new mortgage , the company makes annual lump sum payments in arrears amounting to the difference paid in interest on the capital sum outstanding on the original mortgage at the time of transfer . 

  At Billiton and the Rank Organisation , employees receive some compensation should they lose money on the sale of their properties in the old location . 

  These policies are given in Appendix 1 . 

  Boots ( retail division ) also has a scheme under which employees are guaranteed that if they move a second time , after their relocation , they will not lose financially if there is a fall in the property market . 

  The guarantee is based on the lower of the initial purchase price or a building society's valuation . 

  Boots ( retail division ) also gives a guarantee to employees moving a second time if property prices are rising . 

  It arranges for the house to be valued to determine its minimum selling price and the employee receives a figure up to this amount from the company so that the purchase of the next property can go ahead . 

  ( Employees must maintain their houses in good condition , make every effort to sell at the best price and receive company authority before accepting an offer . ) 

  HIGH-COST TO LOW-COST MOVES 

  Company relocation policies seldom make any special provision for employees moving out of high-cost housing areas to areas where house prices are low , except to review any special allowances which had been paid to ease hardship resulting from living in an expensive area . 

  But one problem which employers may face is employees' reluctance to move to a cheaper area as they can foresee the difficulty of moving back into a high-priced housing area later on . 

  Employees may regard their property in a high-priced area as a " nest egg " for their retirement ( as they may plan to retire to a cheaper area of housing and fund their retirement with the sale proceeds ) or they may not wish to reduce their stake in the housing market . 

  RIGHT OF APPEAL 

  It is rare to find clauses in relocation policies which give employees the right to appeal against relocation decisions or the level of allowances payable . 

  However , local authorities have a local appeals procedure under which officers may appeal if they are dissatisfied with the authority's decision as to whether it is necessary to move home or if they are dissatisfied with any of the authority's decisions in relation to the application of the relocation provisions . 

  CLAWBACK OF RELOCATION COSTS 

  Relocating staff costs employers considerable sums of money . 

  If employees leave their organisations within a few months of relocation , the heavy financial investment in them will be wasted . 

  So it is not surprising to seek clawback clauses within employers' relocation policies . 

  Some firms insist that leavers repay their disturbance allowances if they leave their company within a specified period after the move . 

  Others , however , have clawback arrangements which aim to recover these and other costs paid out in the relocation exercise . 

  At Nabisco , employees receive their disturbance allowance as an interest-free loan , which is " extinguished after one year , provided that the employee is then still in the company's employ " . 

  If employees leave the company within one year of moving , the policy states that " the company reserves the right to request reimbursement of relocation expenses and disturbance allowance on a pro rata basis " . 

  At Cornhill Insurance , employees must also repay their disturbance allowance if they leave the company within a year of the move . 

  Employees at Brown &amp;amp; Root must repay all their disturbance allowance and housing assistance grant if they leave the company within 12 months of moving and 50 per cent of this total assistance if they leave between 12 months and two years of the relocation . 

  The Rank Organisation's policy requires employees who leave within 12 months of moving to repay their disturbance allowance , all fees for which they have received reimbursement , removal costs , travel costs and any out-of-pocket expenses paid by the company . 

  SKF requires employees to repay basic expenses such as fees and removal costs , the disturbance allowance and the costs of temporary accommodation if employees leave within two years of receiving relocation payments . 

  Its repayment clause is quoted below : 

  SKF ( U. K. ) Limited Relocation expense repayment " This payment is made upon condition that if within two years of the date upon which it is made , you give notice to terminate your employment with this company , or we summarily terminate it because of misconduct , you will make repayment to us as follows : -- a ) If such notice is given or the employment is so terminated within nine months , the repayment will be the full amount . 

  b ) If such notice is given or the employment is so terminated after nine months and within 15 months , the repayment will be half the amount . 

  c ) If such notice is given or the employment is so terminated after 15 months and within 2 years , the repayment will be one quarter of the amount . 

  In addition to other remedies , we shall be entitled to deduct any amount due to us as above from any remuneration or other monies which may be due to you .' 

  Henry Sykes and VAG also have clawback clauses in their relocation policies . 

  For details see Appendix 1 . 

  Organisations may also reclaim any monies given but not spent by relocated employees . 

  For instance , at Cadbury Schweppes , employees agree to return any part of their disturbance allowance which has not been spent on items specified in the relocation policy by the end of 12 months from the date of receiving the allowance . 

  TRANSFER OF JOB BUT NOT HOME 

  Travelling costs 

  If an employee is required to work at a new location and the distance between the old and new places of work is short enough to make commuting possible , organisations may not require employees to move their homes . 

  Employees may , however , face problems of increased travelling time or higher fares . 

  As a result , employees may be offered an allowance towards their extra travelling expenses . 

  It is unusual for the cost of extra fares to be given as a lump sum consolidated into salary , although there are a few firms in which this has been agreed . 

  One publishing company which relocated out of central London to the suburbs negotiated a small consolidated payment , with its recognised union , the National Union of Journalists . 

  However , in the main , fares allowances covering the difference in travel costs are paid in full for a short period -- generally up to one or two years and are then reduced over time . 

  At Prudential Assurance , the following terms apply to members of staff who travel daily and do not move home : 

  For the first year after transfer full excess fares less any increase in office allowance will be paid by the company , costs to be based on season ticket rates where appropriate . 

  In the second year following transfer the excess fare payment will be reduced by one third and in the third year by a further third . 

  After this time , no additional payment will be made . 

  However , should the excess fares and/ or office allowance increase at any time during the three year period adjustments will be made . 

  Besides this , employees receive an additional taxable transfer allowance of 526 paid in three instalments over 16 months . 

  Also , if the distance ( based on rail mileage where possible ) travelled daily to and from the new office is greater than that travelled to and from the old office , the basic taxable amount is increased as follows : over 20 miles and up to 40 miles extra per day 132 ; over 40 miles extra per day 263 . 

  Should employees " location allowances decrease as a result of a transfer , any such decrease is phased over a three-year period . 

  Temporary transfer 

  If employees are asked to work in a different location on a temporary basis it is unlikely that they will need to move home . 

  Employers therefore generally pay accommodation and subsistence expenses during the period of the transfer plus the costs of a reasonable number of visits home . 

  COSTS OF RELOCATION 

  Pickfords Removals' publication Executive Relocation in the Eighties estimates that the potential cost of moving an employee from a 70 000 property to a 90 000 property can reach a total of almost 12 000 . 

  It calculates this as follows : 

  the legal costs of sale and purchase of property including solicitor's fees and stamp duty , 3,750 ; estate agent's commission , 750 ; bridging finance ( one month at 13 % ) , 758 ; cost associated with mortgages , in particular the additional cost of a bigger mortgage to cover the greater cost of housing ( company loan over 3 years ) , 1,500 ; cost of removal and , if necessary , storage , including insurance , 500 ; hotel and travel expenses including visits by wife to area to see houses , ( 15 weeks away from home plus two visits by wife ) , 2,420 ; cost of alterations to carpets and curtains , re-installing appliances , connecting telephone etc , alterations to property , redecoration and refurbishment , school uniforms and other educational expenses , maintenance , etc. of vacant , unsold property and miscellaneous incidental costs including vet's fees , kennels , etc. , 2,000 . 

  Many firms do not know how much it costs to relocate staff . 

  Merrill Lynch's Second Annual Study of Employee Relocation Policies Among Major UK Companies found a wide range of estimates of the cost of relocating employees . 

  One in five of the " 303 Times Top 1000 companies " interviewed believed that it costs less than 4000 per person , one in three estimated costs in the range of 4000 to 6000 and a further one in three thought it costs over 6000 per employee . 

  The study found that 17 per cent of organisations surveyed had no idea of the costs of relocation . 

  RELOCATION ALLOWANCES FOR NEW RECRUITS 

  To find the best individual for a particular job , an organisation may have to direct its recruitment programme throughout Britain . 

  This is especially true if the company is looking for key managerial expertise or rare technical skills . 

  The range of benefits given to new employees relocating as a result of accepting a job offer varies widely according to company policy and individuals' circumstances . 

  However , in general , new employees receive some elements of the expenses package given to existing staff . 

  However , new recruits very seldom receive the disturbance allowance which is a common feature of relocation policies covering existing staff transferred at company request . 

  New recruits also rarely benefit from bridging loans or mortgage assistance payments . 

  Organisations do not usually employ the services of a specialist relocation company to aid new recruits moving house . 

  ( However , this does happen occasionally and the relocation companies report that their services have been used for senior new appointments and for technical specialists . ) 

  PA ( a management consultancy ) asked 145 companies taking part in its 1985 " Annual Fringe Benefits Report " to say whether or not they provided assistance when senior executives had to move house to take up a new post . 

  PA found that 90 per cent of the participants transferring existing senior members of staff now bear all the costs associated with travelling expenses , preliminary visits , removal , temporary accommodation , estate agents' commission , legal fees and stamp duty together with a disturbance allowance ... similar costs are borne by 70 per cent of companies in respect of the relocation of a newly recruited manager although a disturbance allowance is not as common in this instance . 

  ( Table 3.6 summarises the survey's findings . ) 

  Reward Regional Survey's " Spring 1985 Local Salaries and Wages " salary survey covering central London contains a section on allowances paid on relocation and recruitment . 

  It cites 33 examples of un-named organisations' policies by industry group and size of company . 

  Seven organisations did not pay relocation allowances to new recruits while of the remainder , eight gave similar allowances under both the relocation and recruitment headings and 18 provided different sets of allowances under the two categories . 

  In the main these 18 firms did not give mortgage assistance or disturbance payments to those recruited . 

  One organisation quoted in the survey did provide disturbance payments for recruits but at a reduced level to that given under its relocation policy . 

  In Merrill Lynch's 1984 Study , 88 per cent of the 243 of " The Times Top 1000 companies " interviewed did take some steps to aid new staff who were moving to take up an appointment . 

  The study found that companies in the food and drink sector were particularly active in helping new recruits relocate with the banks and financial institutions somewhat less likely to assist their new employees . 

  This reflects philosophies of buying in experience or " growing your own " talent in-company . 

  Company practice 

  In Appendix 1 a number of organisations' relocation policies are reproduced and some cover eligibility and levels of relocation assistance given to recruits . 

  On eligibility , for example , Cadbury Schweppes's relocation policy covering new recruits states that " only management new employees will be considered " . 

  At the Norwich Union Insurance Group , if recruitment involves relocation on the part of the employee , the company considers extending its relocation package for existing staff to new recruits . 

  However , these facilities usually apply to specialist categories such as data processing personnel . 

  Billiton ( UK ) Ltd's and the Rank Organisation's relocation policies note that relocation expenses are only reimbursed to new employees in " exceptional cases " . 

  The Rank Organisation's policy defines exceptional cases as those where " the recruit's seniority , special skills , experience or qualifications make it particularly desirable to offer him employment and it appears improbable that he will accept unless a contribution is made towards his relocation expenses " . 

  And on benefits , for example , in VAG's policy , new employees are specifically excluded from receiving bridging finance . 

  In the Rank Organisation policy payments to new recruits may cover the items given to existing employees but the disturbance allowance is not available to new staff . 

  The Rank Organisation's policy also states : " New employees will in no circumstances be eligible for the home sales scheme or the excess cost allowance scheme . " 

  ( These two schemes cover the sale of an employee's old property and financial assistance towards increased housing costs in the new area . ) 

  Cornhill Insurance Group's relocation policy also excludes new staff from receiving a disturbance allowance . 

  Some relocation policies exclude new recruits from receiving other allowances , such as travel and accommodation expenses . 

  Cadbury Schweppes's policy reimburses eligible recruits' furniture removal charges , legal expenses and estate agent's fees but states that : " New employees do not qualify for -- bridging loans , disturbance allowance , travelling expenses , hotel expenses . " 

  In contrast , a few firms do help new recruits with bridging finance and/ or pay a disturbance allowance . 

  At Hambro Life Assurance new staff moving from rented property to rented property receive : the cost of moving to the new area and a disturbance allowance at the company's expense to look for accommodation . 

  Those moving from rented property who choose to buy property in the new location , receive : the cost of moving to the new area ; a disturbance allowance of one month's salary plus 150 ; legal and any other fees and the company may provide financial assistance in the form of temporary mortgage facilities . 

  For new recruits who are selling their old property and are buying a new home , Hambro Life pays : the cost of moving to the new area ; a disturbance allowance of one month's salary ( half paid when the employee joins the firm , the balance when the sale and purchase are completed ) ; two weekends at the company's expense to look for accommodation ; estate agents' , surveyors' , building society and legal fees , including stamp duty and an allowance of 150 per month towards the cost of accommodation and/ or fares for a maximum period of three months . 

  The company may also provide financial assistance in the form of bridging finance and/ or temporary mortgage facilities . 

  All the above allowances apply to existing employees relocating at company request too but existing staff also receive a payment of 10 per cent of salary ( instead of one month's salary ) together with an additional three-monthly allowance of 150 per month towards accommodation and/ or fares ( that is , making a maximum period of six months ) . 

  Henry Sykes's policy provides a disturbance allowance for existing and new employees but new staff are ineligible to receive the bridging loan interest available to existing employees . 

  Both groups are eligible for travelling and subsistence payments , housing visits and special leave at the time of the move but there are differences between other allowances paid to new and existing workers . 

  For instance , existing employees receive reimbursement for estate agents' fees whereas new employees do not . 

  Legal fees and stamp duty for sale and purchase are reimbursed to existing employees ; new staff receive reimbursement of these costs only for buying the new house . 

  Existing employees are refunded for two private survey fees ; new employees are allowed only one . 

  Relocation and the Law 

  This chapter examines whether employers have the right to require employees to move when the company relocates and whether employees are entitled to receive redundancy payments if they refuse to agree to the transfer and are dismissed . 

  It also outlines sex discrimination law and its effect on mobility clauses . 

  CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT 

  The first thing that must be determined when considering the rights of employees when a relocation is planned is what the contract of employment says in relation to employees' place of work . 

  If the contract specifically provides for employees to work in different locations , employers are entitled to insist that the employees honour the terms of their agreement . 

  Thus , employers are acting within their contractual rights if they require the employees to move . 

  Employees who refuse to move are in breach of contract and so , subject to the statutory test of reasonableness , a dismissal is likely to be fair . 

  Employers are also entitled to require employees to move if such a contractual right is implied , although there may be a greater danger of the dismissal being held unfair in such circumstances . 

  On the other hand , if there is no express or implied contractual right ( see below ) to relocate employees , employers can not simply go ahead and relocate their work-force unless they obtain each employee's consent to the change in his or her place of work . 

  Thus , the contractual provisions which deal with employees' place of work are of critical importance . 

  Express or implied terms 

  Express terms in a contract of employment are those which are spelled out -- either written or spoken . 

  Implied terms fill in the gaps between them . 

  A term is not implied , however , merely because it appears reasonable to do so nor if it is contrary to an express term . 

  Employers are entitled to require their employees to move to different premises if there is an express term in the contract which specifies where they may be required to work . 

  Employers may also be entitled to do this under an implied term . 

  Express terms 

  Some contracts of employment contain an express term giving employers the right to transfer employees from one site to another . 

  In United kingdom Atomic Energy Authority v. 

  Claydon , Mr Claydon -- a draughtsman -- was employed at Orfordness in Suffolk and was transferred to Aldermaston . 

  He refused to accept the transfer , was dismissed and claimed redundancy pay . 

  On appeal , the Authority stated that the dismissal was not one of redundancy as their requirements for draughtsmen had not ceased , they had only ceased at Orfordness . 

  But , said the Authority , Orfordness was not the place where Mr Claydon was employed under his contract . 

  The National Industrial Relations Court held that Mr Claydon was not , in fact , redundant as , under the terms of his contract , he could be required to work at any of the Authority's establishments . 

  The conditions of employment which accompanied Mr. Claydon's letter of engagement made clear that the Authority reserved the right of transfer . 

  The NIRC gave employers the following warning : 

  Many men and women are employed under contracts of employment which provide for transfers over a wide area . 

  If work is short in one place but available elsewhere within the area , there will be no redundancy situation and the employer can dismiss without being liable to make any redundancy payment . 

  If , however , he does so without offering to transfer the employee to a place where work is available , he will risk being liable to pay compensation for unfair dismissal . 

  Implied terms 

  Contracts of employment may contain an implied term which gives the employer the right to transfer employees to other locations . 

  For example , in Jones v. 

  Associated Tunnelling Co Ltd the Employment Appeals Tribunal ( EAT ) held that the tribunal had correctly concluded that there was an implied term in Mr Jones's contract of employment to the effect that his employer had the right to transfer him to any site within reasonable daily commuting reach of his home . 

  EAT pointed out that " a contract of employment can not simply be silent on the place of work " and that " the employers were in business as contractors working at different sites ; so the parties must have envisaged a degree of mobility " . 

  Indeed Mr Jones had , in the past , accepted a transfer from Chatterley Whitfield Colliery ( a couple of miles from his home ) to Hem Heath Colliery ( around 12 to 13 miles from his home ) . 

  The transfer to Florence Colliery was very close to Hem Heath and equally accessible to Mr Jones's home but he did not accept this transfer , left and claimed redundancy . 

  Also Associated Tunnelling had issued Mr Jones with the statement : " You may be required to transfer from one site to another on the instruction of the employer " some four years before the end of the employer's contract with the National Coal Board at Hem Heath . 

  In Stevenson v. 

  Tees-side Bridge and Engineering Ltd the Court also found an implied term in the employee's contract to the effect that he could be required to work where directed . 

  Mr Stevenson was a steel erector . 

  In the constructional steel industry sites where work is available are scattered throughout the UK and , as a result , employees in the industry know that travelling around the country is a feature of employment in it . 

  Mr Stevenson had also worked away from his home in Leyland , Lancashire before . 

  When work ceased at an industrial estate near Liverpool ( within daily travelling distance of Leyland ) , Mr Stevenson was offered work at a number of other sites : Northumberland , Anglesey and Manchester . 

  He refused all these , " not on the ground that he was not employed to go there , but on the basis that he thought the opportunity of earning overtime was not good " . 

  The Court held that under his contract of employment the employer was entitled to send Mr Stevenson to any of its sites as required . 

  It followed that the employer was entitled to dismiss him when he refused to go to a new site and was justified in refusing him redundancy pay . 

  In both these cases the nature of the business and the nature of the employees' jobs enabled the courts to imply a substantial degree of mobility into the contract of employment . 

  But , in O'Brien , Pritchard and Browning v. 

  Associated Fire Alarms Ltd , the Court of Appeal held that although there was an implied term in the employees' contracts entitling the employer to move them within reasonable daily commuting distance of their homes in Liverpool , the site which the company wished them to go to -- Barrow-in-Furness -- was beyond this reasonable distance . 

  They were therefore entitled to redundancy payments . 

  It is therefore fair to say that , as a general rule , the courts are prepared to imply some degree of mobility into every contract of employment but this is likely to be limited unless the nature of the job or work performed by the employee is one where mobility would be recognised by both sides as being essential to the job . 

  Changing the contract 

  If the employer is worried about breaking the contract , the ideal solution is to try to negotiate a variation . 

  If the work-force is unionised , this may be done with the union representatives on behalf of their members . 

  Unfortunately this is often impracticable -- particularly in cases of substantial relocation , where employees will have to move their homes . 

  The best that employers can usually hope for is to reach agreement with some of those affected . 

  Financial inducements and , if appropriate , assistance with moving house or travelling , may increase the chances of success . 

  Even if such an agreement is reached , employers may still face difficulties . 

  Employees who initially agree to move may change their minds later , for example because they find other employment in the area which they consider more suitable for them . 

  Although employees who decide not to move may be in breach of contract , there is little that employers can do . 

  The courts would not grant an injunction to force people to work somewhere they do not wish to work . 

  One solution is to state that any financial benefits are only paid when the move has taken place . 

  But even then employers are not necessarily home and dry . 

  Employees may try working at the new location for a short time and then decide not to continue . 

  The redundancy payments legislation allows employees a four-week trial period in which to make up their minds . 

  This starts with the date that employment under the new contract begins . 

  If they leave during this period they will be entitled to redundancy pay provided that the industrial tribunal considers their leaving was reasonable or the job at the new location was unsuitable . 

  It seems this is a risk employers must take , although it is reduced when the employer consults and investigates the wishes of those affected before the move . 

  If people refuse to move ( despite inducements ) the employer may have no option but to dismiss them . 

  Such dismissals may lead to claims for unfair dismissal and/ or redundancy payments . 

  Again the terms of the contract will be important in determining these rights . 

  Unfair dismissal 

  Dismissals are likely to be fair provided that the employer can show a good business reason for the move and that adequate consultation took place . 

  There is usually little difficulty in establishing a good business reason , since without it it is highly unlikely that a company would wish to relocate . 

  Consultation may involve determining precisely why an employee objects to the move and exploring possible ways of overcoming these problems , for example providing travelling facilities or expenses , altering hours of work and so on . 

  ( Under s. 99 of the Employment Protection Act 1975 employers are required to consult with recognised , independent trade unions over proposed redundancies . ) 

  Redundancy payments 

  Employees dismissed under these circumstances will almost certainly be entitled to redundancy payments . 

  This is because s. 81(2 ) of the Employment Protection ( Consolidation ) Act 1978 states that a dismissal is by reason of redundancy if it is " wholly or mainly attributable to ... the fact that his ( i. e. the employee's ) employer ... has ceased or intends to cease , to carry on that business in the place where the employee was so employed ... " . 

  The place where a person is employed has been held to mean the place the employee may be required , under the contract of employment , to work . 

  However , s. 82(5 ) states that an employee loses the right to a redundancy payment if he or she unreasonably refuses an offer of suitable alternative employment . 

  So , if the job at the new location is , in the eyes of the tribunal , a suitable one for that employee , and the refusal of that job is considered unreasonable , the right to a redundancy payment will be lost . 

  In determining whether the offer of alternative work is suitable , the tribunal takes into account factors such as status , skills required , pay , hours of work and whether it involves additional travelling time and/ or expense or perhaps a need to move house . 

  Employees' personal circumstances are also considered . 

  Should the offer be thought to be suitable , the tribunal examines the reasons why the employee has rejected it . 

  Travelling time/ expense 

  The degree of disruption caused by the need to travel further to work is taken into account in determining whether an employee's refusal of alternative employment is reasonable . 

  For example , in Gay v. 

  The Commander , US Naval Activities , UK , it was held that refusal was reasonable due to increased travelling time , travel costs and loss of status . 

  But refusal was considered unreasonable in Sheddon v. 

  James Williamson and Partners as the employer was prepared to meet part of the extra travel costs . 

  ( Also it was common practice in the construction industry for employees to be moved . ) 

  Mr Gay was employed as a foreman mechanic in Hendon . 

  He was given notice that when his employment at Hendon terminated , he could be re-employed at Ruislip as a tester . 

  Mr Gay refused the offer of re-employment . 

  The salary offered for the Ruislip post was marginally higher than that given in Hendon but the tribunal found that the offer of alternative employment at the new location was less advantageous to him . 

  At Ruislip , he would have been nominally in a grade one lower than in his Hendon post and would have not been able to exercise his abilities as a mechanic . 

  Also his journeys to and from work would have been considerably longer and more expensive . 

  The round trip from his home in central London to Hendon and back was about 16 miles ; that to Ruislip was estimated at 26 to 34 miles . 

  The tribunal therefore considered that the employee was reasonable in refusing the offer of alternative employment and recommended a redundancy payment . 

  In Sheddon v. 

  James Williamson and Partners , Sheddon was employed as an inspector of works . 

  Two weeks before his employment was due to be terminated , he was offered alternative employment some 34 miles from his home . 

  His employers offered him additional wages and a partial refund of the extra travelling expenses . 

  Sheddon , however , refused this offer on the grounds that the travelling time to the new place of employment would be over an hour each way , compared with the 25-minute journey to the old site and because the travelling allowance only partly met his increased travel costs . 

  The tribunal found Sheddon's refusal to accept the offer of alternative employment to be unreasonable . 

  It considered the offer of an increased wage together with the practice in the construction industry of employees moving from site to site were important factors in the case . 

  A further example concerns Little v. 

  Beare . 

  In this case , the move of premises meant that the employee had to travel an extra 40 miles each day . 

  Little refused the offer of the alternative employment . 

  It was held that the refusal was unreasonable because the employers had agreed to pay the extra travelling costs . 

  Personal circumstances 

  Employees' personal circumstances , such as their domestic commitments , health and age are often taken into account . 

  Cahuac , Johnson and Crouch were employed by Allen Amery Ltd in Hackney , London E2 and all three women lived very close to their place of work . 

  The employers decided to move to new premises in Goswell Road , EC1 . 

  The applicants were formally offered work in the new premises but they refused to move and were dismissed . 

  They each claimed redundancy pay . 

  The tribunal ruled that all three women were entitled to redundancy pay . 

  Mrs Cahuac lived with her mother and was responsible for looking after her . 

  The longest period for which her mother was left alone was for three hours and Mrs Cahuac worked close by so that should anything happen to her mother during this period she could get home quickly . 

  Acceptance of the offer of employment in the new location would have meant her mother being left alone for periods of seven or more hours as Mrs Cahuac would not be able to check on her at lunchtimes as she was able to do while working in Hackney . 

  Travelling to the new premises also reduced Mrs Cahuac's net pay by 7 per cent and increased her travelling time by about 40 minutes each way . 

  Mrs Cahuac therefore felt that the offer of alternative employment was unsuitable and the tribunal agreed . 

  Mrs Johnson also suffered a reduction in net pay and increased travelling time and was therefore deemed entitled to redundancy pay by the tribunal . 

  Mrs Crouch would not have suffered a reduction in pay as she was offered an increased wage at the new plant . 

  However , after paying travel expenses her take-home pay would have been the same . 

  However , she was aged 59 and the tribunal felt that the inconvenience of long bus journeys to and from work was reasonable grounds in her circumstances for refusing the offer of employment at the new premises ( Cahuac , Johnson and Crouch v. 

  Allen Amery Ltd ) . 

  Mr Charlwood worked in Sunbury and when his employers , KPK ( Sheet Metal ) Ltd moved to Hayes in Middlesex he was offered an equivalent job . 

  However , acceptance of this offer would have increased his travelling time from 10 minutes each way to 45 minutes . 

  Mr Charlwood was a widower with two teenage daughters and did not want to leave them for longer than necessary . 

  It was held that his refusal to accept the offer of alternative employment was reasonable ( Charlwood v. 

  KPK ( Sheet Metal ) Ltd ) . 

  In Cahill v. 

  Keith Prowse , Ms Cahill suffered from claustrophobia and was unable to use public transport . 

  When her company offered her employment at new premises she could no longer walk to work but would have had to undergo a half-hour bus journey . 

  She refused the offer of alternative employment and presented a doctor's certificate . 

  It was held that her refusal was reasonable . 

  Moving house 

  In the main , employees who refuse to accept alternative employment which requires them to move house are unlikely to be deemed as refusing it unreasonably . for instance in Rose v. 

  Shelley and Partners Ltd , Mr Rose's refusal to accept employment some 60 miles away from his home was held to be a reasonable refusal . 

  Mr Rose had worked for his employers , Shelley and Partners Ltd in North London for several years . 

  The company relocated its premises to Huntingdon and asked Mr Rose to move to the new premises . 

  But he refused the offer , left the company and claimed a redundancy payment . 

  Mr Rose himself wanted to move but his wife did not and threatened to leave him if he did accept the offer of employment in Huntingdon . 

  It also transpired that the couple owned their own house and if they did move to Huntingdon , they would have to live in a council house . 

  They had two children -- one at work and one at school . 

  The tribunal ruled that the employee had not acted unreasonably in refusing the offer . 

  However , in Brennan v. 

  Mott , Hay &amp;amp; Anderson , the tribunal ruled that Mr Brennan's refusal to move from London to Newcastle to be unreasonable . 

  Mr. Brennan , who was three years from retirement , lived in a council flat in London . 

  He worked as a tunnel inspector and when there was no work available for him in London , he was offered work in Newcastle . 

  He refused the offer and claimed redundancy pay . 

  The tribunal ruled that Mr Brennan had no family responsibilities and so could live away from home for two or three years and could return home every eight weeks or more often if he chose to pay his own fare . 

  He would also have received a subsistence allowance from his employers . 

  The tribunal therefore ruled him unreasonable in refusing the offer of suitable alternative employment . 

  Mobility 

  In some industries such as construction , mobility is an accepted practice . 

  ( See Jones v. 

  Associated Tunnelling Co , Stevenson v. 

  Tees-side Bridge and Engineering Ltd and Sheddon v. 

  James Williamson and Partners above . ) 

  Organisations with national networks of branches may require managers and/ or management trainees ( or even other workers ) to move throughout the country as part of their career development . 

  However , employers' mobility clauses can be discriminatory ( see below ) . 

  IMPOSING NEW TERMS 

  If a relocation outside the terms of the contract is imposed without the agreement of an employee , the employer is in breach of contract . 

  The employee may then resign and treat this as dismissal . 

  This is because s. 55(2 ) and s. 83(2 ) of the Employment Protection ( Consolidation ) Act 1978 includes resignation by the employee in circumstances when the employer's conduct entitles the employee to resign . 

  It has been held by the Court of Appeal in one instance , that the " employer's conduct " which entitles an employee to resign is conduct which " fundamentally breaches " the employment contract . 

  A fundamental breach is one which the courts would consider more serious than an ordinary breach . 

  It has been described as a breach " going to the root of the contract " . 

  The employee may thus bring an unfair dismissal complaint or claim a redundancy payment . 

  The same sort of considerations apply in determining whether this " constructive " dismissal is unfair as in the case of ordinary dismissals . 

  Equally , the right to a redundancy payment is subject to the rules about offers of alternative employment mentioned above . 

  Moving premises does not always create a breach of the contract . 

  For instance , if an employer moves to premises only a short distance from the old ones , the contract may not be breached . 

  For example , the EAT held that there was no breach in either Times Newspapers v. 

  Bartlett or in Managers ( Holborn ) Ltd v. 

  Hohne . 

  In Times Newspapers v. 

  Bartlett , the employer moved to new premises about a mile away from the old ones . 

  This was a comparatively short distance and in the circumstances of the case , the EAT concluded that the employer had not committed a fundamental breach of the contract . 

  And in Managers ( Holborn ) Ltd v. 

  Hohne , the EAT reached a similar conclusion in that when the employer moved from premises in High Holborn to Regent Street , the move itself did not constitute a fundamental breach because the new premises were just as easily accessible to Mrs Hohne as she travelled by underground . 

  ( However , in this particular case , Mrs Hohne's transfer to the new premises resulted in both her status and pay being reduced as she could no longer hold the post of manageress because there already was a person in this position in the new premises . 

  The employer was therefore held to have breached the contract by reducing Mrs Hohne's pay and status . ) 

  In some industries , like the construction industry , a fair degree of mobility may be implied into the contract . 

  In Express Lift Co Ltd v. 

  F. L. Bowles the employer , relying on an implied mobility clause , ordered the employee to transfer to Scotland from his home in Nottingham . 

  Mr Bowles refused to go as his wife was ill and asked that someone else be sent to Scotland . 

  The employer refused to do this so Mr Bowles resigned and claimed that he had been constructively dismissed and that his dismissal was unfair . 

  The tribunal found that Mr Bowles had been unfairly dismissed but the EAT held that the tribunal had erred in law in making its decision . 

  The tribunal interpreted the implied mobility clause in Mr Bowles's contract that he could be sent to work anywhere in the UK to mean that he could " ordinarily " be sent to work anywhere in the UK . 

  There was , however , no evidence to suggest that the employee's obligation was subject to exceptions in certain circumstances . 

  The EAT said that the tribunal was not entitled to introduce a further implied term into the mobility clause to this effect . 

  In other words , implied terms can not be introduced merely because it appears reasonable or equitable to do so . 

  The EAT had a great deal of sympathy with Mr Bowles and considered the employers rather harsh , but nevertheless , the employee's resignation as a result of his refusal to go to Scotland was neither a termination of contract by the employer nor constructive dismissal . 

  The employee was therefore not dismissed and was not entitled to anything . 

  However , in Air Canada v. 

  Lee a move across London was held by the EAT to be a breach of contract . 

  Mrs Lee , a switchboard operator was asked to move from the company's Dover Street premises to new ones in Regent Street . 

  She tried out the new offices , did not find them satisfactory and left claiming unfair dismissal . 

  The EAT set aside the tribunal's finding of unfair dismissal and found that the employee was entitled to a redundancy payment . 

  Under her contract of employment Mrs Lee was " not mobile " ( i. e. she could not be required to move ) and the employer had committed a fundamental breach of the contract . 

  And in Shields Furniture v. 

  Goff and another , the National Industrial Relations Court ruled there had been a constructive dismissal . 

  In this case an executive director made an announcement to the company's employees that the firm would be moving from Chelsea to Fulham . 

  No moving date was given . 

  About two weeks later , this executive told two employees named Goff -- father and son -- who were employed in the company's Chelsea workshop to go to work in Fulham the next day . 

  This added two and a half miles to their journey to work and involved another 15 minutes' travelling time each way . 

  The employees worked at Fulham for three weeks but were dissatisfied with the conditions there . 

  They then took two weeks' holiday and , on their return , gave one week's notice and left when this notice period expired . 

  They applied for redundancy payments . 

  The National Industrial Relations Court found that at no stage were the employees asked if they were prepared to move to Fulham and at no stage did they indicate that they were prepared to move . 

  There was no term in their contracts entitling the employer to require that the employees move . 

  The NIRC's decision was to award redundancy pay . 

  DIRECT , INDIRECT AND MARRIAGE DISCRIMINATION 

  Under the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 , direct sex discrimination occurs when 

  a person of one sex is treated less favourably , on the ground of sex , than a person of the other sex would be in the same or not materially different circumstances . 

  Indirect sex discrimination occurs when an unjustifiable requirement or condition is applied equally to both sexes , but has a disproportionately adverse effect on one sex because the proportion of one sex which can comply with it is much smaller than the proportion of the other sex which can comply with it . 

  Direct discrimination against a married person occurs where a married person is treated less favourably on the grounds of marital status , than an unmarried person of the same sex would be in the same or not materially different circumstances . 

  Indirect discrimination against a married person is similar in concept to indirect sex discrimination and may arise when a condition or requirement is applied equally to married and unmarried persons of the same sex but which is in fact discriminatory in its effect on married persons . 

  The Equal Opportunities Commission's Code of Practice ( London : HMSO , 1985 ) gives the following example of indirect discrimination . 

  It says : 

  A requirement to be mobile might bar more women than men . 

  A complainant would have to show that fewer women than men could comply with such a requirement and that it is to her detriment that she can not comply . 

  Where the employer can justify such a requirement without regard to sex there will be no unlawful act . 

  A finding of unlawful discrimination may be made even though the employer has no intention to discriminate . 

  And on marriage discrimination it says " a requirement to be mobile might bar more married than single women " . 

  In 1979 the Equal Opportunities Commission ( EOC ) began a formal investigation into the practices and policies of the Leeds Permanent Building Society and produced its report in June 1985 ( Report of the Formal Investigation into the Leeds Permanent Building Society , ( Manchester : EOC , 1985 ) ) . 

  The EOC reports that it was apparent that the Society's mobility requirement and a candidate's ability to comply with it gave rise to both direct and indirect discrimination . 

  The clause stated : " All appointments are made on the condition that a staff member may be transferred to another office or department " . 

  The investigation arose after a complaint was made to the EOC for a woman applying for a post as a management trainee . 

  She said that her interview had laid stress on personal circumstances rather than experience and qualifications . 

  The EOC found that direct discrimination occurred when managers described the mobility requirement differently to men and women and made it more onerous for women to comply with it . 

  The EOC also found direct discrimination when managers treated women less favourably than men by making unfounded assumptions about their ability to be mobile . 

  With regard to indirect discrimination , the EOC conducted a postal survey of all the applicants to the Society in one year to establish whether or not each candidate could have complied with the mobility requirement at the time that they applied for the job . 

  Replies were received from 60 per cent of the people contacted : 830 of the 1384 male applicants and 260 of the 412 female applicants . 

  The EOC was advised that the response was statistically representative . 

  Analysis indicated that only 50 per cent of the women could comply with the mobility requirement compared with 65 per cent of the men . 

  Taking into account the Society's view on the operation of the mobility clause and its own survey , the EOC found that the mobility requirement had a disproportionate impact on women applicants and found it indirectly discriminatory contrary to the Sex Discrimination Act . 

  The results of this formal investigation are very significant for those employers who insert mobility clauses into employees' contracts of employment . 

  Indeed , many employers are now reviewing their clauses in the light of it . 

  Recommendations 

  After consultation with the Leeds Permanent Building Society , the EOC drew up the following recommendations in respect of mobility : 

  A review should be held to examine the extent to which mobility is actually required in the jobs held by staff . 

  The mobility requirement should be removed from contracts of employment of all grades of staff that are recruited where mobility is not required . 

  There should be a statement concerning the degree to which mobility is required in practice , and the way in which the mobility requirement is to be operated in relation to the needs of the staff and the needs of the business . 

  This statement should be issued with an application form to all applicants of both sexes in order that the same information is available to all potential candidates for jobs where mobility is required , or may be required on completion of training . 

  Candidates of both sexes that are interviewed may be asked whether they can comply with the requirement to be mobile in order to progress , however , women are to be treated equally with men and not less favourably . 

  Specific advice should be included in the Branch handbook and training should be provided in order that managers understand what constitutes less favourable treatment , particularly in respect of the asking of questions at appraisal , at interview or before interview because negative assumptions are made about their ability to be mobile . 

  Consideration should be given to whether the internal advertising of management posts would identify those staff who were willing to be considered for a move to a particular branch at a particular time . 

  Only if no suitable candidate emerged would there be a need to consider asking a member of staff to move who had not indicated a willingness to do so . 

  Consideration should be given to whether the requirement to be mobile could be restricted to particular regions while indicating that faster progression might be achieved by staff who were prepared to be widely mobile . 

  After a reasonable period of time ( for example , two years ) there should be a review of the position to determine whether the mobility clause needs to be retained in the contract of employment if it was found that the need for mobility was being met by a sufficiently large group of staff willing to be mobile . 

  LIST OF CASES 

  International Relocation 

  When sending employees abroad to work , employers must consider : the selection of employees for the job ; the importance of briefing them before going ; and the contents of the compensation and benefits package . 

  This chapter aims to provide a broad overview of some of the main concerns facing employers and employees involved in overseas postings . first of all , it concentrates on the relocation assistance given to employees posted abroad to a subsidiary company for a two-to five-year period and who return to a position within their employing organisation in Britain . 

  Next , compensation given to employees specifically recruited to undertake fixed-term contracts overseas is covered and lastly , the chapter examines assistance given to foreign expatriates relocated to Britain . 

  It should be noted that the majority of employees posted abroad are men although the number of women executive expatriates is increasing . 

  This chapter assumes that the expatriate employee is male and references to spouses are directed to wives . 

  However , it will prove interesting to see differences that may emerge in the future with regard to problems facing female executives and their spouses when posted overseas . 

  WHY RELOCATE STAFF ABROAD ? 

  Expatriates may be sent overseas because there is a specific demand for their skills , because they are needed to train local employees in particular procedures or because the expatriates themselves are to receive training so that they can return to their home countries to pass on their newly acquired skills . 

  Other reasons may include an organisation's need to have some of its top employees heading up the management team of foreign subsidiaries , that is , to maintain an international presence , or employees on their way up the career ladder may be posted overseas as part of the management development process . 

  Relocating individual staff abroad is an extremely costly procedure . 

  If an expatriate , rather than a local employee is really needed , the organisation has to consider whether to relocate an existing employee or recruit specifically to fill the post . 

  It must also determine the length of time for which the post is required . 

  Company policies on employee selection and briefing and on compensation and benefits packages will depend on the length of the posting and the type of contract under which expatriates work . 

  EMPLOYEE SELECTION 

  Selecting staff to work abroad on two-to five-year postings is not as straightforward as it may appear . 

  If the selection decision is wrong or the selection process badly handled , the employee , or his spouse or family , may be unable to cope with living abroad and have to return to the UK . 

  This not only wastes time and money in sending the executive abroad but also business contacts in the foreign country can lose confidence in the company and valuable business ventures may be lost . 

  Besides this , other potential expatriates within the company and senior managers at home and abroad may become sceptical of their employer's competence in dealing with international moves and this could jeopardise the company's future success in posting employees overseas . 

  Employers may even run the risk of key employees leaving the company . 

  Before the selection process begins , candidates need to be clear about what the job abroad entails . 

  Job titles can be meaningless by themselves . 

  Candidates therefore need to understand the scope of the job and be given a clear job description . 

  They need to be told what freedom they have to use their initiative and perhaps be given information on the appropriate managerial style . 

  They should also have details of the objectives set for them plus a specification of what the company sees as an ideal candidate . 

  Any specification drawn up should not deal with technical/ academic qualifications and/ or experience alone . 

  It needs to give details of the type of person seen by the organisation as most able to succeed in the foreign environment . 

  Such detail may , in some instances , be best supplied by management in the overseas subsidiary . 

  They probably have a clearer idea of the type of person needed in the post . 

  Alternatively , details about the job and the person needed to fill it may be agreed jointly by the UK company and its foreign subsidiary . 

  Before putting themselves forward for selection , potential candidates and their families need to be aware of the foreign country's environment -- for instance its language(s ) , climate and culture , its housing and education facilities , what security is like , and where they will be living and working . 

  Information on how business is conducted will be required and candidates also need to know details of the compensation and benefits package attached to the posting . 

  The employee's career prospects on returning to the UK at the end of the tour of duty should also be made clear . 

  Determining suitability 

  In some organisations , staff given an overseas posting are chosen or recommended by senior management . 

  There may appear to be only one suitable candidate for the job . 

  Alternatively , in organisations where such postings are advertised internally , there may be only one candidate who comes forward for selection . 

  In both instances , it is important that the candidate is assessed thoroughly to ensure suitability . 

  There is little point in sending an employee abroad because he is the only candidate to apply regardless of his ability to complete the posting . 

  It may be prudent to discuss the possibility of a candidate's overseas posting with as many managers whom he has dealings with as possible or send the employee to an assessment centre . 

  In this way , the organisation does its best to ensure that the employee is likely to be able to meet the requirements expected of him in the job abroad . 

  In organisations where employees sent on overseas postings are recommended by their managers , care needs to be taken to ensure that senior managers are not withholding recommendations for good candidates . 

  Domestic circumstances 

  In determining an employee's suitability , it is necessary to gain an assessment of his domestic circumstances . 

  The employee may appear eminently suitable for a particular post but if his wife is unwilling to relocate abroad and only agrees to do so grudgingly , this is bound to mar the employee's likelihood of completing the assignment . 

  Employees with wives who are actively pursuing their own careers are also likely to encounter problems overseas , especially if the wife is forced to give up her job because of her husband's transfer and her role abroad does not enable her to work or to develop other satisfactory activities . 

  Some organisations employ relocation counsellors , others use their own staff resources , to provide wives with background information on the new location and to answer questions and deal with problems . 

  Although it is not common practice , some firms place wives in employment within the company overseas , where this is appropriate , or take steps to provide them with details of employment opportunities abroad . 

  Alternatively , or in addition to this , wives may be given help in re-entering employment when the couple return to Britain on completing their assignment . 

  Some organisations interview all candidates' wives early in the selection process ; others invite only the wives of short-listed candidates into interview ; a few feel it unreasonable to call into question the intentions of potential expatriates' wives . 

  However , as many overseas assignments fail because the wife or family are unable to cope with the new way of life and culture ( around 50 per cent is often quoted ) , many organisations choose to invite the wives of short-listed candidates into the company to discuss the assignment and any problems that may be worrying them . 

  In this way , it is often possible for organisations to get a clearer idea as to which potential expatriate couples are likely to make a success of their assignments overseas . 

  Interview 

  Candidates for an overseas assignment should have had the opportunity to digest all information given to them on the new job , country , life style , compensation package and effects on their careers and families before being interviewed for the post . 

  In this way those candidates who recognise that they are unsuitable are able to drop out of the process early on . 

  At the interview stage it is important to ensure that candidates will be able to make a real contribution to the business of the overseas subsidiary and be accepted by the employees there . 

  The interviewer also needs to ensure that the potential expatriates have a clear idea of their careers and how an overseas posting followed by a return to work in the UK will aid their career paths . 

  Employees are likely to be concerned about how they will fit back into the system on returning from an overseas contract . 

  Some may fear that during their absence , colleagues remaining in the home country will forge ahead on the career ladder so that when they return to Britain they will find themselves behind and unable to catch up . 

  Such problems can arise if no jobs equivalent to those held overseas are available for expatriates returning to Britain . 

  Once the most suitable candidate has been identified , it is ideal if he can be interviewed by the person who will be his immediate superior in the overseas post . 

  This may be carried out in the candidate's home country or in the overseas location . 

  An interview overseas could be linked with a visit by the employee and spouse who thus have the opportunity to assess first-hand whether they wish to accept the posting . 

  Overseas visit 

  Many organisations pay for employees and their spouses ( sometimes even for the whole family ) to visit the new location before agreeing to the international move . 

  This enables those concerned to gain a firmer idea of what the new country holds in store for them and decide whether they are likely to be happy living there . 

  It also helps the couple find accommodation and schools for children . 

  These trips may be run after the employee has agreed to undertake the assignment and so form an integral part of the briefing process given before the employee takes up his posting . 

  It should be stressed that not all organisations pay for such " look-see " trips and a number rely on providing a thorough briefing in the home country . 

  However , the cost of these trips is minimal compared with the cost of an executive's failure in an overseas assignment . 

  Although briefing is crucially important in preparing people for living and working abroad , it does not provide the realism of a visit . 

  Using briefing only may be a false economy . 

  BRIEFING 

  The employee needs to be given training in products , technologies and business methods used in the overseas company in which he will be working . 

  Briefing on business matters should include basic details such as normal hours of work as well as information on the structure of the work-force , including the nationalities of which it is comprised and where , if any , skill shortages exist . 

  Any effects that the government of the country may have on business dealings should be explained and information on labour legislation be given . 

  It is also very helpful for the expatriate to be given an outline of the local labour force's attitudes towards the company and its managers together with the strength of unionisation . 

  Advice on methods of conducting negotiations with clients or workers is useful . 

  To ensure an employee becomes effective in his work as soon as possible , briefing on the areas mentioned above is most important but no matter how much business information is provided in advance , the expatriate can not give full attention to his work if he or members of his family suffer culture shock as a result of living in a strange environment . 

  Culture shock 

  Some organisations do not see culture shock as a threat to the completion of a term of work abroad . 

  " It's different from England but they will soon get used to it " often sums up the attitudes of those who play a part in posting staff overseas but who have not lived abroad themselves . 

  The executive and his family are being asked to live in an unfamiliar place where the climate , language , laws , religion , etc. are alien to their normal life style . 

  The potential problems can be aggravated by separation from relatives and friends . 

  Again , thorough briefing before departure helps prepare the employee and family for their future life abroad and paves the way for successful completion of the overseas posting . 

  Courses 

  Briefing courses may be aimed at the employee only or organisations may encourage the employee's spouse to attend the briefing sessions . 

  The latter is recommended as the spouse is likely to be equally , if not more , concerned about a new life abroad . 

  It is likely that she will have to give up her employment to accompany her husband . 

  Also , in some countries , a woman's role is significantly different from that in the UK . 

  Some organisations employ specialist counsellors to run in-company briefing/ counselling sessions for the employee(s ) concerned and their spouses . 

  This has the advantage that the courses can be tailored specifically to meet company requirements and individual employee's needs . 

  Firms which are well experienced in overseas employee transfers often have international personnel departments with the necessary resources to organise and run such training sessions . 

  Firms less experienced in international postings should ensure that employees , and where possible their spouses , attend externally run briefings . 

  The Centre for International Briefing runs residential courses for those due to be posted abroad . 

  Spouses are encouraged to attend . 

  The courses focus on specific areas where expatriates are to live , with course tutors usually drawn from the areas in question . 

  The courses provide a detailed insight into the culture of the country as well as local amenities and business practices . 

  They are tailored to company needs whenever practicable . 

  The use of externally run courses can prove to be very cost-effective if an employer sends relatively few expatriates abroad . 

  However , organisations may decide that internally-run briefing sessions may provide the best method of getting the cultural and business message across . 

  Course content 

  Any briefing given must provide sufficient detail on the new location . 

  However , it should not just act as a check-list but should relate facts about a country to the expatriate's new life style . 

  Briefing courses should provide the following general background information on the country : climate ; language ; local inhabitants ; communications ; politics ; cultural differences ; religion ; and laws . 

  Climate 

  Facts about climate -- such as rainfall , temperature , humidity and seasonal variations -- should be given . 

  Information should relate not only to the country as a whole but should apply to the locality where the expatriate is to live and work . 

  Information given must relate to the individual's home and business life . 

  For instance , if there are seasonal variations in climate , these should be explained in the context of their effect on business operations , transport , home environment , etc . 

  For instance , monsoons may disrupt transport and power supplies and may affect the conduct of normal day-to-day business . 

  Language 

  The course should inform participants which languages are spoken in the country concerned , if English is generally used and whether a local language needs to be learned for business and/ or social communication . 

  If it is necessary for the expatriate couple to learn a new language , the course should provide them with details on where they might go or the steps they should take to achieve this . 

  Local inhabitants 

  Background information on local inhabitants is important for both business and social life . 

  The course should give details on the various ethnic groups and , if any particular groups are disadvantaged with respect to others , this should be covered and the implications explained . 

  Local inhabitants' attitudes towards business and social affairs also require treatment . 

  Communications 

  Expatriates need to know how reliable services such as railways , air and sea travel , bus services and telephone , telex and postal services are . 

  Politics 

  The type of government in power and its stability are bound to be of concern to expatriates . 

  Relationships between the government and the employing organisation require explanation too . 

  Foreign policy may also affect the expatriate's business or social activities . 

  Historical information on the country's development and politics can be usefully included . 

  Cultural differences 

  Cultural differences are often the hardest facts for expatriates to accept . 

  Styles of dress which are perfectly acceptable at home may be offensive to local inhabitants or may be banned altogether . 

  Women may not be free to walk by themselves along the streets . 

  Behaviour considered normal in Europe may be unacceptable in certain countries . 

  Alcohol consumption may be banned . 

  Certain unwritten rules may apply with regard to hospitality . 

  It is important that expatriates be fully aware of local customs and their effects on life style . 

  Religion 

  An understanding of the local religions and when religious holidays are taken is necessary . 

  Religion may affect employees' attitudes to their jobs and their relationships with expatriates and fellow countrymen . 

  Certain religions may prohibit particular types of food , alcoholic drink or restrict dress . 

  Law 

  Local laws may ban particular activities . 

  It could not only prove dangerous to expatriates inadvertently breaking local laws but could damage a company's reputation and its business dealings . 

  Living conditions 

  Briefing courses must contain specific information on living conditions including housing , and the provision of utilities , education , health , security , cost of living , taxation , travel and transport , the moving process and other assorted factors . 

  Housing and utilities 

  If expatriates are to live in company housing , details of this , including rent and the items of furniture supplied should be explained . 

  If the expatriate and family are expected to find their own accommodation , information should be given on the types of properties available for rent , how much these are likely to cost together with information on whether they are furnished or unfurnished . 

  The utilities available and charges for them plus details on their reliability should be provided as well . 

  Details of housing allowances should also be supplied as well as advice on whether it is usual to employ domestic staff and , if so , how much to pay them and where they should live . 

  The expatriates need facts on how to look for property in the new country , the hotel and transport allowances payable while they carry out their search and any time constraints attached to their property hunting . 

  In general , British managers are unfamiliar with property rental and are unsure as to how to search for and conduct the necessary transactions . 

  As a result , it is becoming increasingly common for employers to engage the services of relocation companies which help expatriates and their families to find suitable accommodation . 

  The level of service offered varies according to the expatriates' needs and may consist simply of handouts -- printed property sheets with information of what is available . 

  At the other end of the scale , the relocation company assigns a counsellor to the family who assesses their requirements and provides a hand-held viewing schedule . 

  Although it is usual for expatriates to rent housing abroad , some company compensation packages allow for property to be purchased . 

  A loan may be given to the employee , who pays interest on it , so that he can buy property . 

  At the end of his term abroad he sells the house and repays any outstanding debt . 

  Companies may arrange such loans through a third party -- for instance , through the relocation company . 

  Housing at home 

  Briefing should also cover what the expatriate needs to do about property in the home country . 

  The British employee posted abroad normally wishes to keep , and hopes to rent out , his home in the UK . 

  There is usually no great profit on these transactions , despite the high rents achievable on the right kind of homes in the right areas for incoming expatriate employees of firms like his own . 

  The rent charged should be enough to cover mortgage , rates , repairs and agents' fees as well as tax but even this modest target may not be reached in many places without risk of taking in the wrong kind of tenant . 

  Despite the lack of available rental accommodation in the UK , some homes simply are not lettable at rents high enough to cover costs . 

  Employers may well advise their employees to sell their existing homes and buy a more lettable proposition , with a view to re-purchasing when the expatriate returns to the UK . 

  Employers should never advise employees to sell their properties and leave no stake in the UK housing market . 

  House prices in Greater London have been rising at a rate of around 15 to 18 per cent over the past couple of years . 

  House prices up by one-third over two years could spell disaster for those leaving Britain who sold but did not reinvest in the housing market before returning home . 

  Employees may find it difficult to gain information on rent levels which could apply to their own homes . 

  Briefing should advise employees to discuss their situations with managing agents/ estate agents who can provide information on current rents and vet prospective tenants . 

  However , dealing with local agents is another worry for the expatriate and so some employers manage the expatriate's affairs in the UK during an absence overseas by paying the mortgage and rates when the home is empty or when the rent achievable does not cover the outgoings . 

  Alternatively , the employer may engage a relocation company to act as the managing agent for the property . 

  Education 

  The education of children is of major concern to expatriates and briefing courses should outline alternatives and warn about potential problems . 

  Compensation packages generally cover education fees . 

  The decision that needs to be made is whether children should continue their education in Britain or accompany their parents overseas . 

  There are a large number of independent boarding schools covering all abilities in the UK and many expatriates welcome the opportunity to board children especially over 0 and A level periods . 

  However , problems can arise in that long periods of notice may have to be given in order to arrange entry into such schools . 

  Leaving children behind may put an emotional strain on the family . 

  Another problem is that when the expatriates return to Britain , the payment of school fees by the employer generally ends and the couple may not be able to afford to keep their children in private education . 

  The alternative is for the children to be educated abroad in English-speaking international schools . 

  But usually there are waiting lists . 

  Further problems may arise again on return to Britain as the pressure for places in the more popular independent or state schools makes it increasingly difficult for the expatriate to find suitable educational facilities for children . 

  Finding schools abroad may be a daunting prospect for employees . 

  Briefing sessions should provide advice as to how to go about this . 

  Specialist relocation companies offering home search programmes can identify local schools abroad and place children and , as a result , are engaged by a number of employers . 

  Health 

  Briefing sessions should inform expatriates of any inoculations required before departure ; some countries demand up-to-date vaccination certificates against particular diseases before admission is allowed . 

  In many parts of the world , inoculations are advisable even if they are not required for entry . 

  Information should be provided on local medical facilities including availability and standard of hospitals , doctors , dentists , opticians , nurses and ambulance services . 

  Expatriates need details of the cost of treatment and whether medical insurance is required . 

  If the compensation package covers medical insurance/ private health care , details of the scheme and level of cover should be explained . 

  Briefing sessions should provide advice on the precautions that expatriates may take to reduce health risks . 

  Security 

  Some countries have a bad reputation for crime and expatriates are naturally concerned about their chances of being mugged or having their home burgled . 

  Briefing on this topic should cover the incidence of crime , whether it is usual for expatriates to employ security staff and , if so , when such staff should be on duty , and procedures for dealing with the police . 

  Advice on insurance is also necessary . 

  Cost of living 

  Expatriates need to be briefed on how much it will cost to keep their families in the overseas location . 

  Details on prices for food , transport , entertaining , utilities , staff wages , etc. are required . 

  They also need to know what the local currency is , the exchange rate and the rate of inflation . 

  Taxation 

  The briefing session should provide an explanation of the taxation/ social security system in the overseas location and the degree to which the expatriates remain affected by the British system . 

  Personal taxation can be a minefield . 

  No briefing session can deal with individual problems but it should advise the executive moving abroad to ensure that his tax position is handled properly to avoid making costly mistakes . 

  Travel and transport 

  The arrangements for the expatriate and his family's passage to and from the UK and for periods of leave during the assignment should be given together with information on the location of airports/ ports . 

  Details should also be supplied on the cost of running a car overseas , licences/ documentation required , and the costs and reliability of the various forms of public transport . 

  Employees should be informed if a company car is included in the compensation package and if it is usual practice to employ a driver . 

  Expatriates also require information on general driving standards and how to proceed if there is an accident . 

  Information on road and rail access to both the workplace and schools should be given . 

  Employers need to bear in mind that the employee's spouse may not have a car . 

  Removals 

  An employee moving abroad is obviously concerned about the safe handling of personal possessions . 

  Briefing sessions should provide advice on : who is responsible for overseeing the removal -- the employer or the employee ; choosing a contractor ; packing goods ; storage facilities on arrival ; and the time-scale of the removal process . 

  It may be the case that household goods have to be shipped several weeks in advance of the family's relocation . 

  Advice on living arrangements in the few weeks before departure may be necessary . 

  Women 

  A crucial part of the briefing session concerns women's roles in the new country . 

  Such sessions may be addressed only to the wife or to the couple . 

  It is better for both partners to attend so that they can discuss the issue and fully appreciate its implications . 

  The session should provide information on any restrictions placed on women including whether they are free to travel as they please and allowed to work . 

  Employment opportunities -- both in paid jobs and in voluntary activities -- should be explored . 

  The wife may be unable to get a job and may have little opportunity to work in the house especially if it is customary for servants to do all cooking and housework . 

  Social life in the country may revolve around entertainment of business associates and other expatriates in the home . 

  This life style may be unsuitable for some women and boredom can lead to a couple's failure to complete an assignment , even to breakdown of their marriage . 

  Briefing sessions should ensure that expatriate couples are fully aware of these potential problems . 

  Discussion with other members of the group can prove most helpful in identifying areas where conflict may arise and thus provide guidance in handling such situations . 

  The Women's Corona Society ( see Appendix 4 ) has members throughout the world who both welcome and provide useful information to incoming expatriates' wives and children . 

  Other items 

  Other items which may be included in a briefing session on living conditions include : membership of local clubs ; recreation facilities ; standard of dress ; social life ; and whether pets may be imported and the documentation necessary for this . 

  Briefing the personnel department 

  Others also need to be kept in the picture so that they can answer employees' questions as and when they arise . 

  So it is important that those in the personnel department responsible for ensuring that the relocation exercise proceeds smoothly are able either to answer employees' questions themselves or direct the expatriates to sources of advice . 

  It is particularly important that those members of staff who participate in interviews with the potential expatriate and spouse are well-briefed to ask the right questions and in turn provide detailed , helpful responses to any anxieties raised . 

  REASONS FOR FAILURE 

  Good selection procedures and thorough briefing sessions go a long way towards making an overseas assignment a success . 

  But failures do still occur . 

  Expatriates may not adapt to the culture and so live in their own world entirely separate from that of the local inhabitants . 

  The expatriate social circle may prove difficult to break into , with established expatriates clinging to their existing friends and unwilling to allow new members into the group . 

  There may be few opportunities for entertainment other than within the home . 

  This may prove tedious to those used to alternative leisure pursuits . 

  Inability to cope with cultural differences may not show itself immediately . 

  Many expatriates experience a " honeymoon " period abroad where everything appears new , interesting and exciting . 

  But as time wears on , the novelty wears off and dissatisfaction results . 

  Boredom , isolation and loneliness can lead to alcoholism , marriage breakdowns and a failure to complete the assignment . 

  Briefing sessions , in which failures and why they occur are discussed , are probably best held with outside counsellors rather than company staff . 

  Potential expatriates may feel inhibited discussing such personal issues with course tutors drawn from the company payroll in case their anxieties are interpreted as being an expression of inability to cope . 

  Briefing for return 

  An important area to bear in mind when drawing up a briefing programme is the need to supply briefing at the end of the employee's period overseas . 

  Life in Britain may be glorified by the expatriate and family who come to believe that everything back home is perfect compared with their life style abroad . 

  It can come as a considerable shock when reality is forced upon them and their life on return is not as wonderful as they had anticipated . 

  The converse may also apply . 

  Expatriates may feel that Britain has gone " downhill " while they have been away and homecoming does not match up to the good life abroad . 

  For instance , one major problem concerns the social life of the returning expatriates . 

  They may have lost touch with their friends and have to start again to build up a new social circle . 

  Timing 

  Employee selection should not be rushed merely because the overseas subsidiary demands a person in the vacant job straight away . 

  Hurried selection may result in costly failure . 

  Similarly , some organisations do not brief employees properly because they claim they do not have the time to do so . 

  Employees need to be given adequate warning of the date of an impending move so that they can learn about their destination's culture , make decisions on and carry out such matters as renting out their properties in the home country , make arrangements for children's education and ship goods overseas . 

  It is advisable to set target dates for each stage in the international relocation process , working backwards from the date on which the expatriate is expected to begin work in the new location . 

  Allowances for delays should be built into the schedule . 

  Some flexibility may be necessary too . 

  For example , expatriates may wish to link their departure dates with school summer holidays to cause minimum disruption to their children's education . 

  A typical estimate of the amount of time necessary to complete all the stages -- from the preparation of job descriptions and person specifications through to installing the expatriate in his new office abroad -- is around four to six months . 

  COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS 

  This section outlines the principal methods of remunerating expatriates and methods of determining pay . 

  It also lists the items usually included in an expatriate's benefits package . 

  Expatriates' salaries are generally built up from a number of separate elements starting with basic salary . 

  Other payments on top can include premiums for foreign service ( often termed inducement payments ) , hardship allowances , cost of living allowances , housing allowances , tax equalisation payments and bonuses . 

  Basic salary 

  Basic salary may be calculated in one of three different ways . 

  " Balance sheet system " 

  This system is based on the home salary and aims to ensure that the expatriate's standard of living in the home country is maintained while he is working abroad . 

  It also aims to compensate employees working overseas , especially when hardship is endured . 

  Basic salary is based on the expatriate's home salary with a number of allowances added to adjust it to local living conditions . 

  In this way the executive receives reimbursement for any additional costs incurred in working abroad . 

  Basic salary based on company in the host country 

  Under this option the expatriate is treated in a similar manner to local employees -- his basic salary is the same as theirs . 

  However , he may receive some additional benefits which recognise the fact that he is working in a foreign land . 

  His benefit package may include the payment of school fees for his children and the continuation of pension arrangements . 

  Basic salary based on home/ host country requirements 

  Using this method , the employee's basic salary is determined from an assessment of his needs in the host country which are costed by both home and host country prices . 

  These are combined to give an overall requirement which is grossed up for tax and converted into the local currency . 

  The amount of basic salary which exceeds that which the employee would have received at home as a pensionable salary is termed an overseas allowance . 

  Determining basic salaries 

  The basic salaries paid to executives relocated abroad depend to a certain degree on which countries are involved . 

  For instance , it is more common for a British manager working in Europe or in the United States to be paid the local market rate . 

  In contrast , executives working in developing nations ( usually less desirable locations ) tend to be paid their British salaries plus generous allowances for hardship and working in unpleasant conditions . 

  Which system is used also depends on company philosophy and policy with regard to ensuring that expatriates do not lose or gain with respect to their colleagues at home , local employees abroad and other expatriates in other parts of the world . 

  Foreign service premia 

  Foreign service premia -- the international relocation equivalent of disturbance allowances -- are paid to reward employees for leaving their home countries and agreeing to work in a foreign land . 

  They amount to an inducement to encourage employees to accept overseas postings although it can be argued that they do offset the additional costs which may be incurred through unfamiliarity with customs , language and general way of life . 

  They may also be seen as payments to compensate for culture shock . 

  In general , foreign service premia are based on a percentage of salary , usually around 10 to 15 per cent , and are paid throughout the period of the assignment . 

  Some organisations reduce the level of the foreign service premium over the period that the employee spends abroad on the basis that he becomes increasingly accustomed to the life style as time progresses . 

  Some pay an additional disturbance payment to compensate the expatriate when he has to readjust to life in Britain on his return . 

  Hardship allowance 

  Hardship allowances are paid as compensation to those expatriates relocated to countries where they have to face greater discomforts or difficulties than they would normally experience at home : climate , unstable political environments , isolation , separation from children , poor sanitation , and so on . 

  As with foreign service premia , hardship allowances are normally calculated as a percentage of salary -- with higher percentages , sometimes 30 per cent or more , applying in areas where it is particularly difficult or unpleasant to live and work . 

  Remuneration packages may combine foreign service premia and hardship allowances or treat the payment of foreign service premia on a similar basis to that of hardship allowances , that is , the former are increased according to the environment in which the expatriate is asked to work . 

  Cost of living allowances 

  The determination of cost of living allowances causes more problems than any of the others . 

  Sharp increases in local prices which can not be predicted and rises and falls in exchange rates lead to much confusion when trying to determine an expatriate's disposable income . 

  Also expatriates' shopping habits are bound to vary from individual to individual . 

  Many organisations including salary clubs , salary survey producers and even the specialist relocation companies produce their own statistics on cost of living . 

  But , it is difficult to know which statistics are the most realistic and which formulae to use to calculate cost of living let alone how often to update cost-of-living allowances . 

  Most firms believe that consistency is the best policy and stick to a reputable source of data and tried and tested formulae . 

  Housing allowances 

  Housing allowances invariably form a separate part of the remuneration policy ( although it is surprising how many employers do not take them into account when determining cost of living allowances ) . 

  They are paid to compensate for any additional costs incurred in paying for accommodation in the overseas location over and above that which would be incurred at home . 

  In general , housing allowances amount to around 15 per cent of salary although company policy may allow for lower-paid employees to receive greater percentages than those given to the more highly paid . 

  The employee should be clearly informed as to whether the housing allowance covers the cost of the utilities , insurance and other expenses related to the property . 

  As mentioned earlier in this chapter , company policy may vary with regard to whether the expatriate is expected to rent or buy property in the new location or whether he can benefit from living in company housing . 

  ( Generally , the latter is only provided in isolated areas , where there are no local properties for rent or purchase . ) 

  Payments may also be made by companies in respect of expatriates' properties in the home country . 

  Organisations may take on the letting of the employee's property together with its insurance and maintenance or engage a managing agent or specialist relocation firm to do it . 

  Tax equalisation payments and bonuses 

  Payments may be added to the expatriate's salary to compensate for losses through taxation . 

  However , such payments are themselves liable to tax and it therefore becomes very difficult to determine the level of such compensation . 

  Further additions to expatriates' pay may take the form of bonus payments . 

  For example , employees may receive bonus payments on the successful conclusion of their overseas assignments . 

  Problems with pay 

  Working out a salary structure for expatriates is riddled with problems . 

  Friction between various groups of workers can arise if the expatriates earn more or less than local staff or if expatriates in one country receive more favourable salaries or tax treatment than those in other countries . 

  Employees may be unwilling to take an assignment if it involves what appears to be a pay cut , even if local wages and prices in the country concerned are considerably lower than those at home . 

  Organisations may find themselves having to standardise expatriate benefit packages to prevent those employees moving from one country to another refusing certain postings . 

  Determining an executive's salary is not a straightforward task . 

  Sources of information may well be : hearsay ( which can be inaccurate ) ; articles in journals ( which are not usually followed up , making analyses of pay over time impossible ) ; and surveys by international management remuneration consultancies ( which can be expensive and often only contain data from their own members ) . 

  Pay determination is also hampered by such factors as inflation rates and currency fluctuations against the pound . 

  In some countries , notably in Latin America , inflation rates are so high that salaries need to double or more each year to maintain their spending power . 

  And with currency fluctuations , salaries with appear attractive initially can become decreasingly so over time . 

  The payment of an inflation proof and/ or sterling-related salary may be made to get round these problems . 

  OTHER BENEFITS 

  Annual leave 

  Expatriates expect to receive no less annual leave than they are entitled to in their home countries . 

  This includes any extra days given as a reward for long service . 

  However , if the local workers receive higher leave entitlements , the expatriate may feel resentful . 

  If the company's policy is to remunerate expatriates similarly to those in the home country , it is important that this is explained . 

  The amount of leave given may vary considerably from country to country . 

  Employees posted to areas with a harsh climate generally receive greater amounts of leave than those in less severe climates . 

  Holidays may be spent in the overseas location or employees may be encouraged to spend their leave at home . 

  This enables them to conduct their business affairs in person , maintain links with the home-based company and remain in touch with family and friends . 

  Practice with regard to the payment of home leave fares varies widely . 

  Some organisations pay the whole cost ( especially where long distances are involved ) ; others expect the employee to pay and some state that the employee pays the first $ x and the company pays the rest . 

  Allowances and benefits 

  The salary paid to the relocated executive is only the tip of the iceberg . 

  An executive earning , say 15 000 a year in salary may cost the employer as much as 80 000 or more a year to maintain in the overseas location . 

  Items generally included in an expatriate's allowances/ benefits package may be listed under the following heads : pre-departure ; abroad ; fares ; accommodation ; fringe benefits ; on return . 

  Pre-departure 

  Allowances and benefits arranged and paid for by the employer prior to departure include : medical examinations ; inoculations ; passports ; visas ; work permits ; travel to point of departure ; hotel accommodation ; housing costs ( agents' fees , etc. ) ; car compensation ( as in the case of an enforced sale ) ; outfit allowance and language tuition . 

  Abroad 

  In addition to basic salary , bonus , expatriation allowance , location/ hardship allowances , cost of living allowances and other allowances and bonuses ( see above ) employers maintain expatriates' continuity of pension ; pay for insurance and social security contributions in the home/ host countries ; and provide medical insurance ( expenses ) , accident insurance ( 24-hour ) and supplementary insurances ( travel ) . 

  Allowances may be paid for house-hunting and hotel accommodation . 

  Fares 

  Fares paid cover those incurred at the beginning and end of the contract for the employee and his dependants ; host country arrival and departure expenses and the employer may pay home-leave fares and disturbance allowances . 

  Provision for emergency home leave is also included . 

  Accommodation 

  Employers , in the main , pay for the removal of personal effects and any storage charges incurred . 

  The expatriate's home in the UK may be rented out/ managed or bought by the employer . 

  ( Merrill Lynch's 1984 Study , based on a sample of 149 major UK organisations , found that 90 per cent of these firms transferred employees' personal and household effects , 21 per cent covered the cost of the sale of the UK home , 14 per cent managed and/ or let the UK home on behalf of the employee and 6 per cent bought the employee's UK home . ) 

  A housing allowance/ accommodation subsidy or company housing in the overseas location is provided as appropriate . 

  Employers may pay for the provision of furniture/ household equipment and pay for or subsidise the costs of supplying gas , electricity , water and telephones . 

  Fringe benefits 

  Not all expatriates receive company cars and so employers may provide car loans or make payment towards the cost of shipping an employee's car from home . 

  Children's education , either at home or abroad , is paid for . 

  Allowances may be given , as appropriate , for children to visit their parents overseas . 

  The cost of school uniforms is generally covered . 

  The company may also pay for club entrance fees or subscriptions , servants , home/ host country expenses and other expenses . 

  On return 

  Expatriates returning home at the end of their tour of duty can expect payment of travel expenses to their homes and hotel accommodation if necessary . 

  They may also receive a disturbance/ settling-in allowance and a terminal gratuity . 

  Employers also arrange medical examinations and may , in some instances , continue to pay children's education fees . 

  EXPATRIATES EMPLOYED ON FIXED-TERM CONTRACTS 

  When a particular task requires expatriates to work overseas for a short period of time , it is common for employers to hire people with the necessary skills on short , fixed-term contracts . 

  Such expatriates do not work abroad to further their careers within their employing organisations but , in general , accept overseas postings because of the generous remuneration packages which are attached to them . 

  Unlike expatriates relocating overseas as part of a career move , those employed on fixed-term contracts often leave their families behind while they complete their contract . 

  This is especially the case when the expatriate is employed in desert , mining or oil drilling areas . 

  ( However there are some instances where , in pleasanter climates , employees working on fixed-term contracts are accompanied by spouses/ families . ) 

  Compensation 

  Many expatriates working on contract do so on one or two occasions in order to save large sums of money . 

  As a result , firms employing them need to recruit frequently to replace those who choose not to renew their contracts . 

  The compensation package offered is usually based on a local salary , which , when converted into sterling , is considerably higher than the workers could earn in the UK . 

  The salary may also be enhanced by favourable local tax conditions . 

  Much effort may need to be spent in determining the level of salary paid to expatriates working overseas on fixed-term contracts . 

  The salary should match that given to expatriates in the company's full-time employ and , in some cases , those working on contract may receive higher rates of pay . 

  This may reflect the fact that they are not in pensionable service with their employing organisation . 

  A bonus , payable on completion of the fixed-term contract , is also commonly included in the compensation package . 

  This bonus may be given because the employee concerned has no pension rights and does not have an enhanced salary already reflecting this or it may just be a reward for satisfactory completion of the contract . 

  Problems may arise in respect of expatriates working in the same location on longer-term postings or even local company employees who are dissatisfied with their rates of pay in comparison with salaries and/ or bonuses earned by fixed-term contract workers . 

  It is important that all concerned understand the company's remuneration policies to prevent friction between different groups of workers . 

  Such jealousies may lead to valued career-move expatriates and/ or fixed-term contract workers failing in their postings or result in local industrial unrest . 

  Another important element of the compensation package concerns holidays . 

  Fixed-term contracts vary widely in terms of the number of days' leave given . 

  The amount of leave is likely to be considerably greater when the employees' postings involve leaving spouses/ families at home . 

  It is also likely to vary according to country -- employees working in severe climates generally receive a greater amount of leave than those working in more equable climes . 

  Fixed-term contracts may make provision for employees on leave to have their passage(s ) to and from home paid for by the employer . 

  As well as salaries , bonuses and leave , other areas which are usually included in the remuneration package include : housing or the payment of an accommodation allowance ; sick pay and medical insurance ; local transport allowance and travel allowances to and from the UK ; and specialist clothing , tools or kit allowance . 

  Other items which employees require include entry/ exit visas , work permits and details of local laws and working conditions . 

  The employees' contracts should clearly state the length of the assignment for which they have been engaged together with details of procedures for termination of employment -- both on behalf of the employer and the employee . 

  RELOCATING INDIVIDUAL STAFF TO BRITAIN 

  Posting an employee to London is a very different matter from posting someone elsewhere in Britain . 

  London is highly geared to respond to the needs of expatriates from many countries . 

  There are a number of international schools in the London area as well as support groups which cater for different nationalities . 

  The various relocation companies are also able to provide fully accompanied home finding services in and around London . 

  Property available for rent , especially furnished property , is relatively easy to find , whereas in most other parts of Britain only rented property at the bottom end of the market is readily available . 

  The expatriates may , therefore , have to advertise in local papers to find suitable accommodation -- a time-consuming worry if the expatriate and family have already arrived here with no accommodation ready for them . 

  Schooling is also a problem for expatriates based away from London as there are few international schools outside the capital . 

  However , the presence of the oil and microtechnology industries has resulted in the picture being less bleak in Scotland . 

  Edinburgh and Aberdeen both have American schools and reasonable quality rented housing is more readily available than in other parts of the UK . 

  There are also a number of expatriate support groups in both cities . 

  Language and culture 

  Although the expatriate employee working on contract in Britain is likely to speak English , companies should give some thought to the employee's spouse and family . 

  For instance , if the spouse does not speak much , if any , English , limitations on finding work or becoming involved in the local community are bound to arise . 

  Even if the employee is successful in the job , if the spouse can not adapt to live in the English culture and speak the language , the assignment may well fail . 

  Although the relocation firms use bilingual counsellors when helping foreign transferees to find property , this is not considered enough help by some companies . 

  Spouses may be encouraged to attend language courses at colleges of further education . 

  To help expatriates overcome differences in culture , their employers should issue them with briefing documents covering various points of concern . 

  Finding schools 

  Finding suitable schools is another problem facing expatriates coming to Britain . 

  The majority of expatriates choose to send their children to an international school or to a school following their home country's educational curriculum . 

  Fortunately there are a number of such schools in London including American , Canadian , French , German , Dutch , Swedish , Spanish , Norwegian and Greek schools . 

  The majority of these operate " bussing routes " so that the expatriate families do not necessarily need to live close to the school itself but may choose to live along the school bus route , over a wider area of the capital . 

  One problem that can arise is that of a particular school being full and so unable to accommodate the newly arrived expatriate's children . 

  It is therefore advisable for the expatriate to give advance notice to the school of when places are required . 

  When viewing schools to decide which is most suitable , it is again necessary to give adequate notice . 

  International Relocation Company , which specialises in home finding for expatriates , recommends giving at least two weeks' notice for an appointment with a British day school although it says international schools may be viewed at short notice . 

  Opportunities for the spouse 

  It is rare for companies to have formal arrangements for finding work for the spouse of a relocated employee especially as a typical posting to the UK is only for two or three years . 

  However , some firms issue the spouse with details of opportunities available to do voluntary work or attend further education classes . 

  Relocation company counsellors assigned to families moving to Britain also provide information on activities that may be taken up by the spouse . 

  Finding property 

  It is not advisable for an expatriate and family to arrive in Britain without some steps having been taken in advance to arrange accommodation . 

  The employee arrives here unsettled and is unlikely to be able to devote full attention and energies to the assignment . 

  It is becoming increasingly common for companies to pay the costs of a house-hunting " look-see " trip around six to eight weeks before the transfer takes place . 

  These visits are generally about one week long which gives the employee and spouse a reasonable length of time to find accommodation and get a feel for the country . 

  Generally speaking , around 80 per cent of companies sending employees to work in Britain base their relocation compensation packages on rented accommodation ; the remaining 20 per cent allow employees to buy property in Britain . 

  ( Employees relocated to parts of Britain other than London are more likely to have to buy property as there is little suitable rented accommodation available . ) 

  By arranging housing visits six to eight weeks before the transfer , the employee can find property for rent , sign the necessary agreements and return home knowing that the property will be ready on the date of transfer . 

  If the housing visit is carried out too early , say six months before the transfer date , landlords are unlikely to be able to say with any certainty whether property is likely to be available for rent . 

  Setting the housing visit date too close to the actual transfer date will result in problems for the employee with regard to renting out property at home , arranging storage for goods left behind and transport for those items that the family intends to bring to Britain . 

  By viewing properties before bringing household goods to Britain , the expatriate and family can assess accurately which items should be shipped over and which should be left behind . 

  The story of the American expatriate who shipped over his water-bed and then had to spend months trying to find a landlord who would allow him to bring it into his property is a good example . 

  Similarly expatriates are advised to check whether the furnished property includes crockery , cutlery , etc . 

  Unfurnished rented accommodation is no cheaper than furnished accommodation in London . 

  It is therefore easier for an expatriate to leave items of furniture in storage at home than ship them here . 

  However , if the expatriate rents a furnished property and wishes to ship over certain items of furniture , such as a favourite dining table , arrangements may generally be made with the landlord so that any unwanted items of furniture are stored during the expatriate's residence . 

  Another area which may cause problems is that of insurance of household goods . 

  Although the property and the landlord's contents may be insured , it is likely that the expatriate's own personal belongings will not be covered in the landlord's policy . 

  Companies should therefore advise their expatriate employees to take out adequate insurance cover . 

  Some employers pay for this . 

  When looking for property , expatriates will find more accommodation to choose from if they are to rent under a company let rather than in their own names . 

  Many landlords , usually those who own property as an investment , only let to a company rather than to an individual to avoid the tenant's security of tenure offered by the Rent Acts . 

  Landlords generally accept a business release clause . 

  This usually requires the tenant to give sixty or ninety days' notice , sometimes after an agreed minimum period of four to six months . 

  There are , however , expatriates who buy property to use during their two to three year stay in Britain . 

  It can take at least two to three months if not longer to buy a house and any deal initiated during a housing trip may not be complete by the time the expatriate and family arrives in Britain . 

  Some companies pay employees' hotel bills while the transaction is going through . 

  However , hotels may be an expensive option . 

  An alternative is to consider the use of a service flat . 

  These offer accommodation ( complete with cleaners and porters ) on a short-term basis . 

  By contrast , most privately rented accommodation is not available for short periods ( say for a few weeks while a house purchase is carried out ) . 

  Rented property is usually taken for a period of a year with an option to renew for the second and third years of the contract ; even six-month lets are rare . 

  The service flat , however , may be rented for a short period of time and fill the gap between the employee's arrival in Britain and the completion of the house purchase . 

  Once again , service flats need to be booked in advance . 

  Six to eight weeks' notice is advisable . 

  It is possible for employees on housing visits to begin the process of buying property here and also arrange for service flats to be ready for their arrival in Britain . 

  Employers should note , however , that service flats do not always work out cheaper than hotels . 

  Employees buying property in Britain need to furnish it themselves . 

  It is difficult to hire many household items for instance , furniture , dishwashers , washing machines and tumble-dryers although some items such as televisions and videos can be hired easily . 

  It is therefore usual for the company to provide a compensation package which either covers the shipment of the employees' personal belongings to Britain or enables them to buy afresh here . 

  The latter option is less common . 

  Compensation packages for expatriates coming to Britain usually cover schooling costs , private medical care and housing costs . 

  With regard to housing , employers' policies vary . 

  Some provide a flat-rate sum per week to be spent on accommodation . 

  If the full amount is not spent , then the employee pays back the difference . 

  ( Utility charges , but usually excluding telephone costs , are generally paid . ) 

  Alternatively , the company provides a compensation package which amounts to an addition to the employee's salary -- of which any not spent on housing may be kept . 

  Allowances 

  Merrill Lynch's 1984 Study covering 148 British companies relocating staff into the UK found that : 

  Compensation for expenses incurred in house buying was the most common form of assistance given to employees coming into the country ; 53 per cent of those companies bringing in employees will compensate house buying expenses and 37 per cent will provide assistance with the house purchase . 

  About four in 10 companies provide rented accommodation but only a fifth provide a housing allowance . 

  The survey also notes that : " Compensation for temporary travel and living costs , transportation of personal and household effects and disturbance allowances were given by only a minority of companies " . 

  And , it says , " only a fifth of companies provide orientation advice on the localities , schooling , commuting and general amenities " . 

  Merrill Lynch's statistics are interesting in that they indicate that companies prefer to give expatriates coming to Britain financial assistance towards buying property rather than towards renting it . 

  This conflicts with the general view held by other organisations which have considerable dealings with expatriates and their employers . 

  However , the Merrill Lynch survey is based on only a small sample of UK companies ( 148 organisations ) . 

  It is also not clear from the survey whether the companies in question base their expatriates in London or elsewhere in Britain . 

  How to Use This Book 

  Returning to Nursing is aimed at all qualified nurses and health visitors hoping to return to practice after a career break . 

  Written with the aspirations and concerns of returners in mind , it provides a re-introduction and update on many of the issues already encountered by experienced nurses , and an introduction to new concepts and developments in line with current recommendations and guidelines on preparation for re-entry . 

  In the extensive research undertaken for the book it became clear that a number of particular issues posed the greatest challenges to potential returners and to prospective employers . 

  The chapters which follow therefore address these directly . 

  By raising the awareness of returning nurses and health visitors of such important issues as professional accountability , new approaches to the learning process and the learning environment , the implications of research based care and the impact of new technologies in nursing , I hope that the book will help to facilitate a safe and knowledgeable return to practice for both the individual returner and her employer . 

  The book may be used by individuals or as a companion text to Back to Nursing programmes . 

  Chapters 2 and 7 particularly are intended to provoke discussion and debate , and to provide a basis for independent and group study as seminar or project work before , or in conjunction with , supervised clinical allocations . 

  Selective annotated bibliographies address clinical and professional topics ranging from individualised care planning to drug administration , safe handling skills , wound management , the nurse's role in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and many other more specialised skills . 

  The book is very much a general introduction , aimed at providing nurses of all specialties with the essential practical background information required to negotiate a successful return to practice . 

  Popular nursing mythologies are demystified and explained and advice given on tailoring re-entry preparation to suit individual learning needs . 

  By concentrating on the practical implications of new ideas this book should help to promote positive strategies for welcoming nurses and health visitors back to practice at a time when their skills are needed and sought after as never before in the profession's long and distinguished history . 

  Foreword 

  Tomorrow , today will be the " good old days " . 

  It is easy to make lasting judgements based on impressions and recollections from a time when things were different . 

  It is a fact of our lives that change is constant and that change is often feared . 

  It is also very easy to lose touch . 

  Following a break in nursing practice there may be an understandable hesitation and anxiety about returning because of the inevitable changes that will have taken place . 

  There is also an anxiety that through losing touch with developments , skills are also lost . 

  Circumstances such as these can lead to real apprehension about returning to practice . 

  This book is a practical and timely guide to the journey leading to that return . 

  It chronicles recent changes within the professions and the health services and is a useful source of reference and information . 

  It is written in a reassuring way that should positively assist nurses , midwives and health visitors and allay understandable anxieties . 

  The context in which care is given is also subject to change as , indeed , are the professions themselves . 

  Organisational arrangements , educational systems and approaches to treatment and care are all in a continuing state of change and development . 

  For the professions to be sensitive to change , and to meet the needs of patients and clients there must be a constant readiness to develop and adjust to accommodate new challenges . 

  Changes in practice , in turn , call for changes in education and in the professions to ensure that the needs of society are met effectively and that standards are safeguarded for our patients and clients . 

  The professions , collectively , must face these challenges . 

  Individuals returning to practice also face a personal challenge and have their own needs for support and encouragement so that their important transition from a break to return to practice is assisted . 

  This book should assist this process and help practitioners focus on what personal qualities and skills they bring and not just those areas in which help and information may be required . 

  The personal and life experiences which all practitioners bring to practice can enrich nursing , midwifery and health visiting teams and , in turn , the care they give . 

  I hope that this book will be a major source of practical advice and assistance and will encourage the return of practitioners . 

  Colin Ralph Registrar and Chief Executive United Kingdom Central Councillor Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting 

  Introduction 

  The importance of managing a career break effectively is now widely recognised . 

  New initiatives aimed at attracting nurses back to work are springing up and developing throughout the UK . 

  Service managers are waking up to the value of experienced nurses whose understandable reservations about being out of date with current ideas and technologies prevent them from taking up their careers again . 

  At the moment it is theoretically possible for a qualified nurse with 20 years' break in service to be put in charge of an acute ward , and to take responsibility for the management and allocation of staff , even though she may not have any recent or relevant experience . 

  This is clearly undesirable for the nurse , the staff , and most of all the patient , who has a right to expect expert care and attention . 

  The statutory bodies for nursing , midwifery and health visiting have functions clearly defined in law which are concerned with ensuring proper standards of care . 

  Proposals to introduce mandatory re-entry programmes for nurses and health visitors linked to periodic relicensing are one way of maintaining a safe level of practice , and a logical step forward in promoting the importance of maintaining such safety . 

  The central policy-making body for the professions , the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting ( UKCC ) , has already issued guidelines for good practice aimed at improving the standard and content of re-entry programmes available to qualified nurses and health visitors wishing to update their clinical and theoretical knowledge . 

  This book uses as its framework and raison d'tre the concept of mandatory re-entry programmes for nurses and health visitors with a break in practice of five years or more , as put forward by the UKCC in 1989 . 

  The lack of one central source of information and guidance on the provision of programmes , and on the process of re-entry , can make attempts to return something of an exercise of faith and perseverance . 

  This book is designed to help you cut out the hard work , and instead redirect your energies into formulating a worthwhile , personally relevant and practical route into the kind of nursing which appeals to you or suits you best at this particular stage in your career . 

  Reference 

  Deciding to Return 

  Making the decision to resume a demanding job or career is a serious and sometimes hazardous business ; not least because it requires a thorough review and reappraisal of your lifestyle . 

  If you are single and ambitious , then your career pattern and development will be important to you , and any prospects for promotion in the longer term are a significant factor when looking for the right opening . 

  If you are married , or committed to a serious relationship , have one child or more and a home to support , then the hours you work and the amount of travel involved in getting to and from work may limit your options . 

  I have been careful not to make any assumptions about you . 

  I have avoided attempting to stereotype you and the life you lead . 

  From my own experience of listening to nurses who want to return , the reasons they give and the levels of motivation they express are multifarious . 

  It may be that the untapped pool of non-practising nurses are in the main housewives and mothers , or frustrated office workers . 

  If you are either , or both , and you feel that your time has come , then there is much relevant information for you in the chapters ahead . 

  The men and women I have met come from all sorts of social and employment backgrounds . 

  Some have reluctantly had to give up an earlier nursing career because of ill health , or to care for a dependent partner , close relative or friend . 

  Frequent house moves caused by a partner's promotion may have made any long-term employment unviable . 

  Some have worked abroad as volunteers , on extended vacations or in casual jobs , and have then found it difficult to get back into the mainstream of a career . 

  Others who have been in permanent employment as nurses have found the restrictions of poor pay and stringent working conditions too harsh . 

  As a result , they have been forced into less desirable but more lucrative employment elsewhere in order to support an " acceptable " standard of living . 

  Often softened by nostalgia for what they recall as the security of their " training days " , I have heard older nurses enthuse about the cosiness and order of day to day nursing . 

  Distant recollections of established routines and clearly defined duties represent a world where the ability and willingness to carry out instructions was of paramount importance . 

  Bridging the gap 

  As a general nurse who trained in a large London teaching hospital , and qualified shortly before the demise of the General Nursing Councils and the introduction of the new statutory bodies for nursing , midwifery and health visiting , I have found listening to the reminiscences of those who have experienced a considerable career gap both salutary and frightening . 

  Salutary , because I am made more aware of the advances made in developing the nursing role in health care . 

  Frightening , because the apparent chasm stretching from past to present experience seems vast and commands respect . 

  The challenges facing nurses in the 1990s are likely to be as great as any the profession has ever faced . 

  No one could or should pretend that nursing in the future will resemble nursing in the past . 

  If you are fortunate enough to live in an area where the local district health authority ( DHA ) has a positive and dynamic recruitment policy , then bridging the gap between jobs will be high on its list of priorities . 

  If it already runs a back to nursing course then it will also have established a policy geared towards attracting you back to work . 

  The types of courses available are looked at in detail in chapter 4 . 

  If you should decide to accept a place on a course , do not rush out to buy textbooks until you have finished reading this book , and guidance on returning to learning in particular . 

  Lengthy booklists are expensive and dull : with some time and effort it will be possible for you to build up a personal library and reference system which is individually geared to your particular needs , and one which helps you to build on your existing knowledge rather than attempting to start again from scratch . 

  If for some reason you can not or choose not to attend a course , then you will have to find some means of charting your progress with the limited help made available by colleagues . 

  If you live or work within borrowing distance of a nurse education centre , then you should ask for the name of the post-basic or continuing education tutor . 

  Even if he or she does not answer to this title directly , there is usually one member of staff who has responsibility for supporting and assisting qualified staff with their continued professional education . 

  The nursing and medical libraries can be made accessible to you , as can the skills of the librarian , for whom finding that elusive reference you have searched for can become a personal crusade . 

  Reviewing career goals 

  Detecting and quantifying the innate personal attributes of the effective nurse has puzzled recruiters for many years . 

  Recent attempts by psychologists to arrive at psychological tests which identify desirable characteristics in candidates has had only limited success . 

  The criteria for selection which rest on school examination results and rapport with the interviewer are still widely used . 

  Mature students who lack the requisite O-levels or GCSEs can opt to sit an alternative entrance test , although there is some confusion over the purpose of such tests . 

  Are they designed to assess levels of intellectual ability , or do they have an ulterior motive in seeking to shine a light on a suitable psyche ? 

  Who knows what makes a good nurse ? 

  Definitions often dry on the tongue . 

  Nursing has been described as a skilled occupation rather than a profession . 

  You will either belong and adhere to this school of thought , or you will be outraged at the very suggestion . 

  A skilled occupation is a more accurate description of the task-oriented kind of care carried out by tradition . 

  As the eminent nursing historian Monica E. Baly points out , in the nineteenth century sense nursing did not qualify for professional status : " ... nurses were not independent practitioners and indeed , the insistence on obedience was anti-ethical to independence and self-sufficiency " . 

  I assume therefore , that Monica Baly's own definition of a profession rests at least in part on independence and self-sufficiency . 

  Professionalism implies a contract with society ; a promise that good faith will be justified . 

  If you trust to a lawyer or a doctor , then it will be against his code of ethics to betray that trust . 

  In her book Professional Accountability , Monica Baly takes this a stage further : 

  If professions have an implied contract with society which gives them " status , authority and privilege " then society wants certain assurances in return ... skill is not enough , there must be a code of ethics which indicates how clients and patients should be served and the attitudes that should be accepted ... 

  Clearly , no one should enter a profession without subscribing to its fundamental tenets . 

  Perhaps the most important and far-reaching change in nursing in the past ten years has been the wholesale move away from the subservient , passive role of the nurse who was accountable to doctors for any treatments she undertook , and to nursing supervisors for standards of personal conduct and discipline . 

  The emphasis placed on current practice could be described as self-sufficiency ; an ability to make and act upon decisions arrived at from a position of sound professional judgement , decisions arrived at independently of doctors but complementary to their assessment of patients . 

  Doctors are expected to assess medical needs ; nurses are themselves expert at assessing nursing need , or to put it another way , at assessing the need for nursing aspects of care . 

  In choosing to nurse , you therefore must take on board the ethics required of your chosen profession . 

  These have now been laid down by the UKCC in its Code of Professional Conduct for the Nurse , Midwife and Health Visitor . 

  The introduction to the code is crystal clear : 

  Each registered nurse , midwife and health visitor shall act , at all times , in such a manner as to justify public trust and confidence , to uphold and enhance the good standing and reputation of the profession , to serve the interests of society , and above all to safeguard the interests of individual patients and clients . 

  The code goes on to outline what is required of a registered practitioner in the exercise of " professional accountability " . 

  A closer examination of the component parts of the code is given in chapter 4 , when we begin to look at the implications of the code in respect of standards of nursing care provided by the qualified nurse or health visitor . 

  How you measure up to making decisions in the light of your clinical and theoretical knowledge will have a direct bearing on the quality of care you are able to give . 

  The ability to assess , plan , implement and evaluate care , whatever your area of clinical expertise , will become a large part of your role as a qualified nurse . 

  Nursing need not necessarily be viewed as a career . 

  I have heard many other definitions ( not all of them polite ) , but most people agree that advancement of some sort features in their long-term plans for the future . 

  Proposed changes in the clinical career structure should make clinical nursing less of a poor relation in terms of financial recognition and status . 

  The old standards of nursing management having superior status to clinical nurses are gradually phasing themselves out , and certainly in the future you will not have to move away from the bedside solely to boost levels of pay . 

  When reviewing your own goals for the future , it might be useful to look at some of the positive aspects of nursing as a career , to see whether you still identify with them . 

  Nursing can provide me with : 

  An opportunity to work with and care for people of all races , communities and creeds . 

  The satisfaction of helping fellow human beings in need . 

  Work which is relevant to family life , where skills acquired may be utilised outside the immediate work environment . 

  A wide variety of specialisms which can be adapted to suit my own interests and aptitudes . 

  Opportunities for promotion once I have made a clear commitment to the work . 

  Work which will enable me to travel abroad . 

  Work which can earn me money in my spare time . 

  Work which can be used as a stepping stone to another career . 

  If reforms in the career structure and nursing education go ahead as planned , then you may be able to add the following to your list : 

  More realistic pay , dependent on my level of expertise and the amount of responsibility I hold 

  An environment in which the nursing student is supernumerary , with improved facilities for teaching and for sharing my teaching role with other colleagues . 

  Opportunities for the development of clinical and managerial skills , with a clearer role for the specialist nurse practitioner and adviser . 

  If you want to go back to basics and try to assess the sort of person you are , and the kind of working environment best suited to you , then there are a number of exercises you can do with an honest friend . 

  These are explained in Jill Baker's book What Next ? 

  If you lack this insight or are looking for a new direction , then Baker can help ( see Recommended reading at the end of this chapter ) . 

  Most of you , however , will already have a good idea of where you would feel most secure . 

  This may be your principal guide in choosing a route of re-entry . 

  If the reason you left nursing in the first place was boredom or disillusionment , it may be that you had drifted into an environment which failed to take advantage of your best qualities . 

  If so , now is the time to decide exactly what it was that made the work so stale and uninteresting . 

  Consider the following , and see how many words or phrases describe your feelings -- as you remember them -- at the time you left nursing . 

  Bored 

  Frustrated 

  Undervalued 

  Lacking in confidence 

  Scared of making a mistake 

  Confused or unsettled 

  Keen , but thwarted by managers 

  Overmanaged 

  Professionally isolated 

  Impatient for results 

  If any of the first five are included in your list , take heart , because these can be dealt with and are avoidable . 

  The second five are more difficult , but probably say a great deal about the style of management you worked under , and the quality of relationships you had with colleagues and peers . 

  It is also important to look at why you took up the job in the first instance , even if 20 years have elapsed in the meantime . 

  This might have coloured your attitude to the work , and be relevant when you want to make a fresh start : 

  It was the only vacancy offered to me at the time 

  The hours suited me 

  I desperately wanted to work there 

  I was told it would be " good experience " for me 

  I do not really remember 

  I liked the staff running the ward/ unit 

  I enjoyed the specialty 

  I was marking time until something better came along 

  More than two negative reasons for accepting a job can take a heavy toll on your resources of enthusiasm , particularly if you had the added disappointment of being turned down for the post you'd really hoped for at the time . 

  Assessing your motivation to return 

  Having made a tentative decision to come back to nursing , it would be similarly useful to compare your reasons for doing so in the light of the previous exercise . 

  Are you bored with your present job ? 

  Is this your only alternative to unemployment ? 

  Have you missed nursing and long to return ? 

  You may know of someone who has already tried it and succeeded . 

  You may be attracted by an advertisement in your local paper , or perhaps reading the nursing press has aroused your interest . 

  Perhaps your domestic circumstances have changed , and you are now able to resume what was once an enjoyable way of earning a living . 

  You may feel guilty at letting hard-won skills go to waste . 

  You may have heard very positive things about a local employer . 

  You may , dare I say it , need the money . 

  It can be quite illuminating to write down a few vague goals , and then to discover just how deepseated your real feelings about nursing can be . 

  If you can do this after an informal interview or visit then so much the better . 

  One glimpse of a resuscitation trolley or a bunch of keys can be enough to send any romantics back to their Mills &amp;amp; Boon ! 

  Motivation may be nine tenths necessity . 

  The vital tenth , an enthusiasm for the work itself , is a helpful prerequisite , especially when it comes to convincing a prospective employer . 

  He or she will want to be convinced that you are serious in intent , and will also want to be reassured of your staying power . 

  The costs involved in properly re-orientating and updating staff are considerable . 

  The argument that this is money well spent only bears out if you then follow up with a reasonable period of reliable service . 

  Opinions vary as to what constitutes " reasonable " in this case . 

  If you are put in the position of having to commit yourself to one employer , establish well in advance of accepting a job or secondment offer exactly what will be required of you in terms of subsequent employment . 

  If you have decided to train for an entirely new specialty , such as health visiting or district nursing , you may find yourself having to reimburse course and equipment fees if you leave the job before a specified date of up to two years after your training has been completed . 

  If this seems unreasonable to you , you may want to reconsider . 

  Nursing in the marketplace 

  Your skills are in short supply and have acquired a rarity value undreamed of in the 1970s . 

  One visit to a nursing careers fair will convince you of this . 

  The shortage is worldwide . 

  Selling your skills 

  This may sound a rather aggressive and mercenary way to go about things , but it is the philosophy to which I am referring , rather than your personal approach . 

  I do not expect you to haggle , for example , but an element of bartering over hours and conditions can improve your working life considerably . 

  What employers will be interested in is the confidence and faith you have in yourself to revise and update your clinical skills in order to place them in a service context . 

  Before putting yourself or your past experience down , as too many nurses are inclined to do , think instead about the stressful situations and important decisions you have had to face since leaving nursing . 

  If you have brought up a family , and survived , then you are more than capable for anything nursing can throw at you . 

  Do not underestimate the value of life experience ; that is your natural instinct and ability to overcome whatever obstacles or hindrances are put in your way . 

  So many returners admit to stage fright at the beginning of a re-entry programme , only to find that the expectations of managers and colleagues are much more realistic than they have given them credit for . 

  It is far from the interests of your employer to scare you into a kind of beavering submission . 

  Employers will , of course , want to make clear to you the level of personal responsibility you will be expected to take within the remit of your job description ( for a sample job description , see chapter 2 ) , but this does not necessarily mean that they are trying to warn off the less confident . 

  It is you they need , and your skills they must be prepared to help you to adapt and improve . 

  I am not going to suggest that you play hard to get . 

  You never know who is behind you in the queue . 

  What I am suggesting is that you should not underrate your ability to succeed in what is now a highly competitive market place . 

  Acquiring new skills 

  The lazy among us will always claim that it is more difficult to learn as you get older . 

  This is a matter of fierce debate . 

  A willingness to learn and perseverance are much more important than candles on a birthday cake . 

  Much really depends on the quality of opportunities open to you to refresh old skills , and to introduce new ones on a sensible timescale and with proper supervision and support . 

  You will not have to depend on now or never clinical demonstrations in the clinical room ; nor will you be reduced to knock-kneed terror at the prospect of a viva voce examination . 

  The education of nurses is now much more student-centred , focusing on the consolidation of skills already mastered , and on the gradual introduction of new and unfamiliar techniques by practice and experience . 

  Your personal experience of relationships and interaction with others can be enhanced and built upon in a constructive way , thus helping to inspire both personal confidence and a learning environment where you will not be inhibited from admitting to a lack of knowledge or understanding . 

  Passive acceptance and rote learning of facts and procedures is now discouraged ; you will instead be expected to participate fully in an exchange of views and information . 

  At the same time you will have the benefit of your supervisor's own competence and expertise on the subject . 

  All this could come as a shock to your system if you were the shy and reticent student who hid behind more extrovert col-leagues . 

  The reassurance that there is a place for all of us in the scheme of things should help a little . 

  The virtual extinction of the dragon sister tutor should also help to allay your fears . 

  The UKCC Code of Professional Conduct states that every nurse , midwife or health visitor should " Take every reasonable opportunity to maintain and improve professional knowledge and competence " . 

  This includes the acquisition of any new and relevant skills and applies equally to staff employed on a full or part-time basis ; in the public and the private sector . 

  This means that you have a responsibility to find " reasonable opportunities " by actively seeking them . 

  Make clear to your new employer that you are looking forward to continuing your professional education . 

  They should be well placed to help you to help yourself . 

  You may find that after an initial burst of enthusiasm , your employers run out of steam and seem reluctant to fund you on courses or give you conference or study leave . 

  Ironically , it is sometimes shortage of staff which prevents them from letting you go . 

  Until you and other recruits swell the establishment figures , pressure on service managers will continue . 

  Occasionally politics comes into this , and you may notice that the same member of staff always gets the best deal . 

  Be prepared to question this if you want to , and do not retreat from any withering looks . 

  Even if you work only a small number of hours , you still need to review and assess your progress on a regular basis . 

  Any opportunity to advance your studies should be seen as an important part of your continuing in-service education . 

  Expanding opportunities in the NHS , the private sector and abroad 

  As the available range of therapies and treatments grows , there is no doubt that opportunities for in-depth specialisation in supporting patients or clients grow with it . 

  Rigid divisions of patients by medical condition are much less usual now , and remain the province of obsessional medical students and old school consultants , for whom classification by organ is a time-honoured tradition . 

  The number and variety of specialties open to qualified nurses is wide , and probably has no equal in any other profession . 

  If your plan is to move ahead quickly and gain promotion in as short a time as possible , you would probably fare best in an area where the shortage of suitably qualified staff is most acute . 

  To be taken seriously , you will have to demonstrate an understanding of the problems facing the specialty you want to work in , and be able to communicate sound ideas for progress . 

  Qualities of leadership and innovation are always in short supply . 

  It is no accident that men fill most of the top jobs in nursing , while women remain on the lower grades . 

  The reorganised NHS will -- for most of you -- be the first port of call when looking for new employment . 

  It may be that you feel most secure in returning to a familiar environment . 

  For all but a few of you , however , the pattern of working and the hierarchy itself will have changed beyond recognition . 

  It is certainly true that the priorities favoured by one style of management have no guarantee of being upheld by another . 

  A move from consensus management , where a small , but arguably representative nucleus of people had at least some say in the decision-making , to a more dictatorial style known as " general management " now means that decisions are made by one man or woman who may accept or reject the advice of interested parties , including nursing and medical advisers . 

  The idea , introduced by Sainsbury's chairman Sir Roy Griffiths in his 1983 review of NHS management , is vested in meeting business-like objectives , with stricter costing of the service , and unit managers being held directly responsible for staying within set targets and providing an adequate service at the same time . 

  As part of your readjustment you will find yourself becoming much more cost conscious , and aware of the cost implications of continuing with practices which may be wasteful , or unwieldy , given cheaper alternatives . 

  One of the most striking examples of this is the policy on drug prescription . 

  More generic drugs are now used , and stocks are much more carefully controlled . 

  Likewise sterile supplies and instruments are less plentiful than you may remember . 

  Different units will have found different ways of saving money . 

  This is a potential source of conflict between service staff and managers if the service side feel that supplies are inadequate or to the detriment of patients . 

  Regardless of your area of specialisation , the old epithet of " tried and trusted " has been replaced by experimentation and sometimes cursory evaluation of what is achieved by one approach to a nursing procedure over another . 

  On the positive side , high quality nursing research has begun to have an effect on the way nursing practice is carried out . 

  The importance of knowing why we do things and not just what to do has altered many of the concepts and shattered many long held perceptions about the effectiveness and quality of care we give to patients . 

  An appreciation of the whys and wherefores of nursing research is fundamental to good practice and an introduction to this for the uninitiated appears in chapter 7 . 

  It is change of this kind which is more likely to surprise and challenge you when you first return . 

  If you should decide to concentrate on one particular nursing specialty then you will probably want to undertake a clinical nursing studies course . 

  The Joint Board for Clinical Nursing Studies disappeared in 1983 when the new statutory bodies for nursing came into existence . 

  The work of the JBCNS , the General Nursing Councils , the Central Midwives' Boards , the Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitors , the Committee for Clinical Nursing Studies and the Panel of Assessors for District Nurse Training was taken over by the new United Kingdom Central Council and four National Boards for England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , respectively . 

  Although the UKCC is the central policy making and administrative body responsible for setting and maintaining professional standards , and much more ( see chapter 5 ) , it is the national board of the country in which you choose to practice that is responsible for executive action on nurse education , ensuring that it meets the UKCC's rules and requirements . 

  Postbasic certificate and statemented ( the latter are generally shorter ) courses are validated by the boards and a list of current courses and training establishments can be obtained by writing directly to the boards or to a delegated careers advice service . 

  Useful addresses appear in the Appendices . 

  You can also enquire locally to see whether your local DHA has details of course vacancies . 

  Different centres of excellence will usually offer courses in their own specialism ; you may find you have to work away from home on secondment if your first choice is limited to only a few specialist centres . 

  Examples of this are courses in accident and emergency , neuromedical and neurosurgical nursing or ophthalmic nursing . 

  The trend in nursing education certainly favours the progression of clinical nursing specialists . 

  If you are interested in the current thinking on this the RCN has recently published a useful document Specialities in Nursing . 

  Public or private sector employment ? 

  Your chances of promotion to a position of responsibility in nursing and health visiting are undoubtedly greater in the NHS , if only because of its number of employees . 

  As the largest public sector employer in Europe it can offer scope for experience in management and education , in research and in clinical nursing itself . 

  However , there are many new avenues opening up for qualified staff in areas which have not traditionally been associated with nursing . 

  Joint initiatives between establishments of higher education and health authorities offer a more dynamic and interdisciplinary approach to learning , with virtually unlimited scope for a career in lecturing , research or publishing . 

  Entrepreneurial skills are also being utilised , with more nurses going into business for themselves ; running employment agencies , nursing homes and conference organisations . 

  The independent sector continues to grow , particularly in the fields of routine and day surgery and health screening . 

  Health visitors are rarely employed as such outside the NHS , although the qualification itself can provide an entry gate to other positions , particularly in advisory capacities to child health and other voluntary organisations , in health education and teaching at tertiary and higher education levels . 

  Health visitors who study for a further education teacher's certificate can be employed as curriculum planners and lecturers on nursery nursing courses and pre-vocational courses aimed at recruitment to the NHS . 

  The view that private sector employment is a waste of valuable career time is less widely held , now that the private sector is beginning to take its share of providing additional training and in-service education facilities for its own employees . 

  In some cases joint ventures between the private sector and the NHS are succeeding in taking on areas which are proving too costly or cumbersome for the NHS alone . 

  Ideologically you may be committed to working for the NHS . 

  This should pose no problems . 

  If you are in a quandary , however , as to which to choose , and are unsure of the different kinds of work available in both sectors , you could begin by reading the classified advertisements in either Nursing Times or Nursing Standard . 

  Both carry details of jobs in the independent sector and the Standard has occasional recruitment supplements which may look in more depth at job opportunities . 

  You could also try working for a nursing agency . 

  This way you may be able to get a taste of different or unusual working environments before committing yourself to one or the other . 

  Some agencies are particularly keen to attract nurses who have had a break in practice and provide reorientation for new staff . 

  Agency nursing and the option of working in a nurse bank run by NHS or private hospitals is discussed in more detail in the next chapter . 

  Nursing abroad 

  The lure of glossy full colour advertising , particularly when it depicts sparkling blue skies , golden beaches , and smiling , sun-kissed off-duty nurses , is potent and seductive . 

  But , however confident you are after being wooed and won by an overseas recruiter , you may feel isolated and vulnerable once you have signed a contract and find that you are on your own . 

  If you are seriously contemplating taking your skills abroad , then it may be advisable to invest some time in updating yourself at home first . 

  If you are uncomfortable with the idea of attending a local NHS run course , then some form of distance learning package , which involves studying at home with some tutorial support , may be what you need to get you started . 

  It is also wise to seek the advice of the international department of your professional organisation . 

  The RCN runs a comprehensive advisory service for its members and can offer the benefit of continued professional indemnity insurance . 

  Attempting to take up a post abroad without any preparatory updating could be courting disaster . 

  If your new employer has offered to provide you with facilities for updating , make sure that this is included in your contract of employment , and that it is backed up with meaningful support and supervision . 

  You do not want to run the appreciable risk of making a bad mistake before your new career has really started . 

  References 

  Recommended reading 

  Building Professional Confidence 

  Reassessing your skills 

  According to McEvoy self-evaluation is the hallmark of the reflective practitioner . 

  Certainly some reliable measure of the way you deliver nursing care is necessary and valuable , both for the client ( or patient ) and his environment , and ultimately for the sense of satisfaction you can enjoy yourself as a reflective practitioner of nursing . 

  As McEvoy suggests , time , like money , should be budgeted : " The reflective practitioner will avoid taking on more than he or she can accomplish calmly and effectively ... 

  If nurses were as careful with time as they tend to be with money , their professional effectiveness would take a meteoric rise " . 

  Your personal recollection of evaluation may be limited to semi-formal evaluation " sessions " tacked onto the end of a study block or course , when you were invited to give your personal views and answer preset questions on the strengths and weaknesses of the work or study methods , quality of lectures , usefulness of discussions and so on . 

  Nowadays evaluation has a tendency to be much more structured and less prosaic . 

  Self-evaluation requires you to be completely honest with yourself , but in a constructive rather than a negative way . 

  You may be dissatisfied with your reflection in the mirror but you do have to admit that it has its good points ! 

  In the same way , self-evaluation can mirror those things which require reappraisal , those which only require a little attention , and those which need a complete overhaul . 

  Reassessing the skills you bring back to nursing or health visiting can be a worthwhile preparation for returning to practice , even if you feel a poor judge of what skills might be most needed in the future . 

  Judging by the experience of former returning nurses it is the professed loss of practical and handling skills which gives rise to most worry . 

  It does not help when tutors attempt to compare such skills to riding a bicycle . 

  Perhaps you were always a bit wobbly anyway ! 

  You may have recollections of taking a long time to achieve competence in one particular skill , and wonder whether on returning you will be given adequate time to practise and revise . 

  If you had anticipated returning to clinical nursing without undertaking a re-entry programme first , then this kind of worry will have to be ironed out during your period of reorientation to the ward or district . 

  If you are in this position , or even if you are lucky enough to have obtained a place on a re-entry course , it may help to make a tentative assessment of the skills you feel need to be reassessed in order to practise safely . 

  Identifying your learning needs 

  Sooner or later you will be given an opportunity to discuss your learning needs with a senior nurse . 

  This may be a tutor , ward sister or charge nurse , or a member of the ward team who is designated to work as a " mentor " -- a personal counsellor and guide throughout your reorientation period and even beyond . 

  As a starting point , try drawing up individual lists of skills , dividing them into : 

  Those you could do straight away . 

  Those you feel you would soon revise and become competent in . 

  Those you would feel unhappy about attempting without first having received advice and instruction . 

  This can be a useful group exercise as well as an individual one . 

  If you are going to confide in each other , however , it is important to respect each other's different tolerance levels . 

  Some people can feel very intimidated and experience a temporary crisis of confidence , especially if they have been in employment which is entirely unrelated to nursing . 

  Years away from the bedside can distort your view . 

  Past experience in nursing can also reflect a very hierarchical , even military approach , and some " procedures " may have suffered at the hands of obsessional and aggressive teaching . 

  Fortunately , much more than rote learning of " trays , trolleys and treatments " is now expected , and a preoccupation with rigid routines is a thing of the past . 

  Once you have completed the basic exercise given above you will have a ready reference on which to draw when identifying your personal learning needs . 

  It helps if you can limit your first list to those skills you will require in one clinical area . 

  In this way you will not be overwhelmed by too many gaps and can build on your experience one stage at a time . 

  Acknowledging your limitations 

  Even if there are significant gaps in your knowledge it should be possible to get help with these in advance of being given clinical responsibility . 

  One problem which has been described to me by nurses and health visitors who returned to practice before the advent of re-entry programmes is the difficulty represented by assumed knowledge . 

  The depth of knowledge assumed by colleagues who have never experienced a break in service can undermine the confidence of returners , even if the supposed lack of knowledge is more imagined than real . 

  Admitting to a lack of knowledge or competence is embarrassing and difficult , particularly if time and staff are limited and something needs to be done quickly . 

  Identifying these areas is not always easy or straightforward . 

  They can not always be anticipated . 

  You may not realise until you are asked that you do not have the skills required . 

  The UKCC Code of Professional Conduct ( see Appendix 1 , clause 4 ) is very clear in stating your obligation here : 

  Acknowledge any limitations of competence and refuse in such cases to accept delegated functions without first having received instruction in regard to those functions and having been assessed as competent . 

  Failure to take due regard of this obligation places your patients at risk and may jeopardise your right to practise . 

  Your position could not be clearer . 

  Of course life is not always as simple as that , and being asked to cover for a colleague at very short notice or an unexpected cancellation or transfer on the theatre list can throw your best laid plans into disarray . 

  When discussing the lessons , problems and failures arising from the disciplinary hearings of the former General Nursing Councils , Reg Pyne , now the UKCC's director for professional conduct , extends this obligation to nurse managers : 

  Nurse managers have a responsibility for the settings in which patients are cared for which is far greater than the same responsibility of nurses at large , simply because they are employed in positions which enable them to make appropriate representations . 

  They bear this responsibility not only that the patients may receive safe and competent nursing care but that the nurses working in those settings are not rendered vulnerable by excessive pressure . 

  Not only is it unprofessional to fail to acknowledge your limitations , it is equally unprofessional for managers to delegate care to a nurse who is unsure of her ability to implement it safely . 

  However , this still does not tell you what to do in a crisis or if an unexpected emergency arises . 

  If you are unfortunate enough to be faced with such a situation then the only responsible advice I can suggest is the same as that offered to nursing students . 

  Refuse . 

  Refuse politely , out of earshot of the patient involved , and give your reasons why . 

  Regardless of the experience of your senior nurse momentary aberrations do occur , particularly under pressure , and he or she may simply not have realised the implications of what was being asked . 

  I can think of very few occasions when you would not have the time to state your case . 

  If the situation is one of life or death , and you are the only person available , then it could be argued that you should not deny whatever limited skills you have to the person whose life is in danger . 

  This is a grey area which depends a great deal on the actual situation , and it may be worthwhile introducing it to discussions with managers or teachers for the benefit of other nurses , and to share ideas on how you would approach such a problem . 

  Self help 

  Most employers are only too keen to introduce new employees gently to their employment . 

  It is difficult for them to know just how great are the gaps in your knowledge and the limitations on your competence , and so they will depend on you to make your own initial assessment . 

  Any learning process is a continuum dependent on listening , hearing , observing , questioning , listening , hearing , observing and then understanding . 

  Breaks in this chain can inhibit the learning process and lead to a breakdown in effective communication . 

  Listening to yourself can be a first step in identifying a learning need or goal . 

  I do not know enough about ... 

  My concentration is poor . 

  I cannot digest this information . 

  I do not understand why this should happen . 

  I get the two things confused . 

  Try writing down those things which you feel you absolutely need to know more about before being given responsibility . 

  This differs from the previous exercise in that you are not looking directly at skills , but at the theoretical knowledge you require to undertake those skills safely . 

  I run the risk of sounding patronising here , but I do feel that this is a point worth making . 

  You may be surprised at the length and diversity of this list . 

  You may find that a pattern emerges , or that one subject or area comes up time and time again . 

  To take this a stage further I would like to paraphrase the skills outlined in a sample job description , and identify some learning needs which might arise from it . 

  If you have already been offered a job and have agreed on a job description with your future service manager , then you may like to analyse it in the same way . 

  " The staff nurse , in the absence of the ward sister or charge nurse shall : 

  Lead and co-ordinate ... to ensure that the programme of each patient's care ... is effective and meets the individual patient's needs . 

  Assume responsibility for teaching and supervising all ( nursing ) team members . " 

 'As part of everyday responsibilities she shall : 

  Interpret the significance of clinical observations and records , making appropriate decisions , and planning nursing care accordingly . 

  Assist in delegated clinical research . 

  Determine nursing priorities on a daily basis and plan patient care according to staff availability and capabilities . 

  Maintain an awareness of circumstances which can affect standards of care and act accordingly . 

  Inform and support relatives as appropriate . 

  Maintain professional confidentiality . 

  Ensure accuracy and legibility of clinical and legal documents . 

  Encourage good working relationships and communication within the health care team . 

  networks within the health care team . 

  Ensure continuity of care . " 

  The above is only an extract from a full job description but nevertheless I can already identify four areas where I would need guidance and information before I would feel capable of meeting my responsibilities safely . 

  1 

  Teaching skills , as appropriate to the particular clinical setting and those I am expected to teach . 

  2 

  Clinical research skills . 

  Having no real experience of clinical research I would need to undertake some form of assisted learning in research appreciation and the application of practical research skills . 

  3 

  Management skills . 

  These may need to be reviewed and updated in line with my new clinical environment , and a new or different approach to team management . 

  4 

  I would need to revise my knowledge of patient/ client confidentiality so that I may not inadvertently be in breach of proper professional conduct . 

  This exercise should help to clarify the kind of theoretical and practical knowledge you need to update and give you valuable insight into the nature of the job before you return to practice safely and enjoyably . 

  Job expectations and rewards 

  Expectation and reward are entirely subjective , and a matter of personal preference . 

  Your expectations of future employment will be influenced by your past experience and any feedback you have had more recently from people in similar jobs . 

  Watson discusses the meaning of work and separates motivation to work into intrinsic and extrinsic satisfactions . 

  Human groups may vary as to the extent they are able to gain satisfaction of either type : 

  Examples of intrinsic satisfactions 

  Inherent satisfaction 

  Personal fulfilment . 

  Something to take a pride in . 

  An increase in self-esteem . 

  Work which is enriching . 

  Examples of extrinsic satisfactions 

  Doing the work for financial gain . 

  Needing " the company " of others in the work team or setting . 

  Work used as a means to an end . 

  Watson stresses the importance of the individual's personality as a factor influencing the meaning and value of work on a personal level , but adds that additional factors such as age , upbringing , sex , education , nature of employing organisation and social class matter too . 

  From a sociologist's point of view , work has shades of meaning which are individual to each of us . 

  Nursing as work or as a vocation can mean different things to different people . 

  Presumably most of us work for the same principal reason -- in order to live -- but the choice of job may be influenced more by necessity than choice . 

  Options available may be severely limited by matters of health , geographical location , intelligence , family commitments and job availability . 

  What attracts a nurse or health visitor back to practice is likely to be a combination of intrinsic and extrinsic factors . 

  Historically , nursing has probably offered a mix of both satisfactions , although financial gain would probably come quite a way down on the list . 

  The general public has a tendency to assume that nurses experience a strong desire to care for others , perhaps believing that many feel a true vocation or " divine call " to the work , although it is probably less usual to describe it in these terms today . 

  Because aspects of the work are those which are less palatable to some , being considered as messy or " dirty " work , there is an implied element of personal sacrifice and supplication on behalf of those who are sick and perhaps suffering . 

  Professor Chapman breaks down potential nurses into two distinct categories . 

  The first is prepared to accept certain personal sacrifices in order to care for others ; the second is the frustrated medic -- the nurse who ideally would be studying medicine or one of the biological sciences . 

  The latter is more likely to seek work in such areas as intensive care or renal dialysis where equipment is likely to be intricate and of vital importance , rather than in those areas requiring mainly basic physical care of the patient . 

  Professor Chapman points out that this does not necessarily lead to a drop in standards of physical care , but stresses the apparent risk that patients may occasionally be made to feel " merely an appendage to a machine " . 

  A natural consequence of an affinity to mechanical things , and an ability , what is more , to master them , is generally accorded more status than direct patient contact . 

  Such jobs enjoy a higher status and may be considered more popular and glamorous than others . 

  As Professor Chapman observes , high status nursing can be seen as a route to social mobility ; the more closely the nurse works with a doctor as a member of the team , the more prestigious the job is assumed to be . 

  If your expectations or primary motivation in doing a particular job is to be upwardly mobile , it is unlikely that you are going to want to get involved in a job which remains at the bedside . 

  Recent trends in the professions have , however , challenged this way of thinking . 

  Both professional organisations and the statutory bodies have worked hard to achieve a career structure which rewards so-called " hands on " nursing , and moves away from a system whereby the standard route for promotion is removal from direct patient care into a separate hierarchical management role . 

  Financial rewards 

  Attempts to restructure and remunerate accordingly are the basis of the new clinical grading exercise introduced in 1988 . 

  By assessing each post individually , the peculiar responsibilities of the post will be identified and the nurse placed on a pay scale which recognises her experience and expertise . 

  The regrading of every qualified nurse in post has of course proved to be a colossal and traumatic exercise for both management ( acting under Department of Health directives ) and the nursing unions whose job it is to mediate on behalf of members . 

  It is the level of the government's ongoing commitment to honour the recommendations over pay and conditions of the Nurses' and Midwives' Pay Review Body ( PRB ) which has so incensed the professions . 

  The sometimes insensitive and arbitrary methods employed in carrying out the regrading exercise has aroused scorn , derision and even despair from those who were led to believe that substantial pay increases were to be honoured at last . 

  By October 1988 , the original deadline for the completion of the regrading exercise , both the unions and management had still to reach agreement . 

  Although the government had set aside over 800 million to cover regrading and the funding of the 1988 pay award , additional pressures were being put on DHAs to find the money for any shortfall in their budgets from their service budgets . 

  The implication of moral blackmail in robbing patient services to pay nurses remained a ghost at the banquet for the media , and for many nurses , who had still to reconcile the jobs they had perhaps been doing for years with the management's idea of their responsibilities , and the clinical grade to which they aspired . 

  It would be worthless to dwell on the strengths and weaknesses of the regrading exercise here , other than to acknowledge the apparent difficulties associated with it . 

  In the context of nurses and health visitors returning to work it might be more useful to look at the ways in which regrading affects your application and appointment , and to provide you with general advice on what to expect from employers in due course . 

  Clinical grading and the returner 

  Table 2.1 is general advice , obtained from the Labour Relations department of the RCN . 

  Any specific queries arising from it may be addressed to your local branch steward if you have one . 

  Members of the Confederation of Health Service Employees ( COHSE ) and the National Union of Public Employees ( NUPE ) should also approach their stewards for help . 

  Contact names and numbers can usually be found on staff noticeboards or obtained from regional offices . 

  Members of the HVA can contact the Labour Relations and Professional Department at headquarters ( See Appendix 2 ) . 

  Revised pay scales do not apply solely to employment within the NHS . 

  Most reputable employers who were previously bound by " Whitley " should honour the new scales . 

  Practice nurses working in GPs surgeries or working for small scale employers may find themselves subject to tougher negotiation . 

  An explanatory booklet from the RCN entitled Understanding Clinical Grading may be available from your nursing office or the nursing library . 

  Alternatively you can purchase your own copy . 

  Contracts of employment 

  When you are offered a contract of employment it is worth studying the fine print and clarifying anything you do not understand . 

  Your entitlement to paid leave and overtime , plus arrangements for being allocated to another place of work to cover for staff absence , should be made clear . 

  If you are unsure or you want to check current staff and service agreements then seek the advice of your trades union via a local steward or regional office . 

  If you do not belong to a union then ask to see the employer's handbook detailing minimum terms and conditions and ask to amend your contact in advance of signature if you feel this is necessary . 

  Your pay grade on appointment will depend upon the job you will be doing . 

  There is a range of pay scales , nine in all , from A to 1 . 

  These cover nursing auxiliaries , enrolled nurses , staff nurses , sisters and clinical specialists . 

  Credit may be given when determining your commencing salary for completed years of nursing service in an equivalent or higher grade than before the break . 

  The clinical grading structure could give rise to some difficulties in deciding whether previous posts held were equivalent or higher than the new grades and it would be advisable to clarify your position at interview . 

  Performance related pay , at the moment , applies only to senior managers . 

  If you have a problem which is too difficult for you to resolve on your own then as an RCN member you have the choice of going to your local steward , the convenor or any other branch officers , or to full-time officers based at the RCN office for your region . 

  The RCN is able to offer you support , advice and protection on professional and employment issues through its network of stewards and full-time officers . 

  To be able to represent you , however , the RCN has to be " recognised " by the employer for that purpose and the RCN can not force any employer to grant that " recognition " . 

  In places where the RCN is not recognised then representation can only be given as a " friend " . 

  All those whose names are on the Register of nurses maintained by the UKCC are eligible to become a member of the RCN whether they are practising or not . 

  The RCN does not issue general guidance to those returning to nursing but is willing to offer advice to individuals if approached . 

  Table 2.1 Advice from the RCN 

  Some employers will include an advisory interview or session with the district finance officer or personnel officer in order to work out income tax and superannuation or pension fund arrangements , or you can request an interview if such an offer is not forthcoming . 

  When you are working out general costs of working vis NP vis earning do remember to take into account the costs of studying for any additional qualifications . 

  Your employer may not be able to refund all of your study expenses , particularly if the period of study involved is extensive . 

  Conditions of work and returning health visitors 

  When considering an offer of a job in the community it is worth asking a few questions about the day to day management of the service , and the kind of support you can expect to get from your colleagues . 

  Reference to the setting up of neighbourhood nursing teams appears in chapter 7 , together with an introductory bibliography of suggested reading . 

  On a practical and down to earth level it is worth finding out what clerical support you are likely to get in the clinic or base where you will be working . 

  Who is there to answer the telephone when you are not there ? 

  What assistance and support in managerial and professional terms can you expect from your neighbourhood nursing team manager ? 

  What are the aims and objectives of the post ? 

  What opportunities are there for group as well as one to one initiatives in health promotion ? 

  How is the health visitor's role perceived within the primary health care team , and what approach to their work is taken by medical colleagues working with the neighbourhood nursing team ? 

  What specific social problems are prevalent in the area and what support can you expect in trying to prioritise for special need ? 

  How much help will you need as a returner in the management of caseloads and identification of priorities within that caseload ? 

  What is the continuing education budget post-entry and the employer's commitment to assist you in furthering your own professional commitment ? 

  Professional indemnity insurance for health visitors is avail-able to members of the 17000 strong TUC-affiliated Health Visitors' Association , the professional organisation and trades union for health visitors and school nurses . 

  More information on continuing education programmes organised by the HVA and other professional advice and activities appears in chapter 4 . 

  There are a limited number of DHA run re-entry courses for community nurses , and some of these may have modules or input designed to assist health visitors back into practice . 

  The difference in costs between HVA two-week courses and DHA courses may be considerable , but not necessarily . 

  It is worth exploring possibilities for both . 

  You may prefer to pay more for a course geared specifically to the needs of health visitors rather than something more general , and may be able to recoup at least part of the costs of attending a course from your local continuing education budget . 

  You may feel that a local course would have more relevance to the job you want or appreciate the opportunity a local course gives you to make new contacts in the district where you will be working . 

  If there is any possibility of a period of supervised practice before returning to work it is worth taking , in addition to any period of standard reorientation . 

  It will give you the chance to ask questions and get the feel of current practice before committing yourself and will help you to identify learning and professional needs at an early and manageable stage . 

  Regular meetings with other health visitors for information purposes or purely as support groups can help you to combat the isolation sometimes described by health visitors working in both rural and inner city communities . 

  Health visitors can be employed in a part-time capacity , and the job theoretically lends itself well to jobsharing . 

  A booklet which includes guidance for managers and would-be job-sharers , as well as a model agreement , can be obtained from the HVA . 

  Addressing fears and anxieties 

  Whatever your past experience or clinical area of expertise , you may still feel apprehensive and nervous about returning to practice , even after completing a re-entry programme . 

  It is important for you to have these natural fears recognised and legitimised . 

  You should not be made to feel inferior or unusual because you have respect for your considerable responsibilities . 

  Coping and support networks can be built up gradually as part of a group exercise and on your own and can provide a forum for discussion and shared experience as well as letting off the inevitable steam and frustration experienced at one time or another . 

  The main inhibitors to progress , and the root causes of fear , can include : 

  Unrealistic personal goals and expectations . 

  Unimaginative goals . 

  Taking criticism of your efforts personally , occasionally being " super-sensitive " . 

  Allowing stress to deplete your resources . 

  Fear of failure . 

  Lack of appreciation and positive feedback from those around you . 

  Fault finding and negative thinking on either side . 

  Professional isolation . 

  Lack of a peer group . 

  Fear of failure or being made to look foolish in front of others ( especially patients and junior staff ) . 

  Lack of interest or enthusiasm for the specialty or special problems of patients/ clients . 

  Trying to take on too much too soon . 

  Regular support meetings for new staff and course tutors can be arranged informally when a re-entry programme has been completed . 

  This is useful for both parties as problems experienced by returners can be anticipated and dealt with for the benefit of new course members . 

  Meetings need not be addressed by any one person although a specific topic can be aired for discussion if the group wishes . 

  These meetings can provide an opportunity to be sociable and to exchange views and experiences as they arise , and can help to reduce tension and the feeling that you alone have the monopoly on making elementary mistakes . 

  Keeping up to date with developments in your own specialty can go a long way to adding to your confidence . 

  Attempting to get to grips with all the developments in nursing over the past five years is meat enough for any expert , and you will not be regarded as letting the side down just because you are not familiar with all the latest terminology or research in your clinical specialty . 

  You will be expected to become more involved in teaching within your own clinical setting but this does not mean that you have to prepare lectures or notes in advance . 

  Much more is made these days of adding to existing experience and finding solutions to individual problems of patients rather than attempting to apply nursing practice to clinical symptoms and multiple medical diagnosis . 

  Nursing students are now more accustomed to researching information for themselves than perhaps you were used to , and to asking pertinent questions . 

  What you can expect is to be asked to justify your approach to nursing problems . 

  Very experienced nurses can find this difficult to cope with but are beginning to realise the value of such an exercise in identifying ways of improving care to patients . 

  Follow up any critical analysis of your work with positive suggestions for improvements . 

  What did you do well and what were your weaknesses ? 

  If there is someone at work whose approach to patients or clinical abilities you admire then observe them and use them as a role model . 

  Adapt the best of your practice to the benefit of the experience and see whether you can combine the two successfully . 

  If you want to you can keep a diary or journal of your progress , rewarding yourself for every new skill mastered or job well done . 

  Make notes on those areas where you feel you need guidance and help , and resolve to seek out that help as soon as possible . 

  Laughing at your own silly mistakes can help to take away any embarrassment and the need to apologise constantly for your gaucheness without any loss of dignity or selfrespect . 

  Patients will often be your greatest ally when testing yourself for the first time . 

  Sharing your experiences with someone whose judgement you respect and value can help you to place any short term worries in their proper perspective . 

  Membership of a professional organisation and a relevant forum or interest group will help to keep you informed of developments in the field and give you access to study days . 

  It can also help to raise your awareness of new research and any political influences or undercurrents which stand to affect the way services are managed . 

  Research awareness will keep you one step ahead of changes in policy as related to practice , and help you to field questions from students and other colleagues . 

  Remember that your colleagues need your reassurance too , to confirm that they are doing the right thing . 

  Acknowledge encouragement and assistance from them and support them in return . 

  If you find it hard to accept authority from younger nurses who may have less overall experience than you , try to explain your difficulties to them rather than allowing resentment to build up between you . 

  They can feel just as threatened by you and need to have your co-operation as they learn to manage resources and personnel effectively . 

  High handedness may be the result of nervousness on their part which could be defused if you both take the trouble to see the other's point of view . 

  However tempting it may be , try to avoid falling in to the trap of " in my day we did it this way " or you may receive a stinging reply . 

  Try to have your progress reviewed regularly with your nurse manager , so that neither of you makes misleading assumptions about your ability to cope or happiness in the job . 

  If you do need to . 

  express any dissatisfaction try to do in it a constructive and diplomatic way . 

  She , too , places her professional reputation on the line and any criticism of the clinical environment or her style of management needs to be handled tactfully if it is to receive a good hearing . 

  Although it may at first feel as though you will always be the new member of staff , or that you will never stop asking questions , most returners express appreciation and gratitude for the support and practical help offered by colleagues , and for the warm welcome extended to them on their return . 

  Hospital chaplains and your own minister may be able happy to support you through stressful and difficult times , particularly if you are working in an emotionally stressful area . 

  The spiritual resources of patients can do a great deal to help in their recovery or bring about a peaceful death . 

  Acknowledging and respecting the religious observances and convictions of others can help to overcome otherwise distressing or depressing experiences and often succeeds where conventional medical and nursing measures fail . 

  The willingness to share in the experiences of patients ; to share their sense of loss , disappointment , anger and grief and the spiritual anguish which can challenge the way they have thought , perhaps believed and behaved in the past , can add to your nursing care much more than withdrawing from or denying such experience . 

  Nurses are no longer expected to sublimate their feelings behind starchy officiousness as has been the case in the not so distant past . 

  The ability to communicate and to build bridges in human relationships is now recognised as an essential nursing skill ; and the opportunity for offering comfort and unconditional acceptance in this way probably has no equal in any other profession . 

  References 

  Practical Issues at Home and Work 

  Before taking on any job commitment it is worth looking at your personal priorities in detail , and working out where work will fit in . 

  Although this sounds obvious , it is quite remarkable how many returning nurses remark on the problems of adjustment they encounter once the initial " honeymoon " period of returning is over . 

  Having satisfied the urge to " have a go " , they can sometimes be surprised by the everyday practical ramifications of taking on a new job . 

  Nurses who have married or had children since they last nursed may be intellectually aware of what unsocial hours can mean , but if they have not actually experienced them recently they can be caught unprepared . 

  Many of the challenges expressed could be avoided with proper planning and fore-thought . 

  Those I mention here are the most often talked about and may be helpful for some readers . 

  Working hours 

  Where possible , seek an employer who is prepared to be flexible . 

  If you have decided to work to a prearranged minimum number of hours , make sure you know which days you will be needed , and whether it is acceptable occasionally to exchange duties with another member of staff . 

  If there are aspects of the job which you would ideally like to share then put these to your manager and discuss possibilities . 

  It is helpful to define these areas in writing so that you both know where you are . 

  Some employers will not allow you to " job share " officially , but may be open to revising your job description to fit in with local service needs . 

  If you work less than 37.5 hours every week then you will be classed as a part-time worker . 

  Part-time working does not affect your right to study leave , nor does it mean that you should be given only those jobs which no one else wants . 

  Whatever your commitment in terms of hours worked , you should be able to make a contribution of the same quality as any member of the full-time staff . 

  Some employers may encourage you to start with fewer hours than you think you can manage , with the intention of adding to these as you gain more confidence . 

  You may find this frustrating at first , or appreciate the extra breathing space it gives you . 

  It is probably easier to add on extra hours than to take on too much and then find you have to reduce your hours because of outside commitments or for other less foreseeable reasons . 

  A staff nurse who began by working on an elderly care ward part-time from 9am to 2pm is now working virtually full-time , despite having five children . 

  Thanks to understanding managers and colleagues the transition has been effectively man-aged and her service contribution has become invaluable . 

  Her family soon knew what to expect and so the potential for resentment was never allowed to build up . 

  If your employer has crche facilities on offer , and your ability to work depends on them , find out well in advance of taking the job what hours the crche is open , the standard of care offered , and the charges made for the service . 

  Crches can be expensive to run and it is possible that charges will be prohibitive , particularly if you are returning on a modest pay grade . 

  You may be limited by the hours the crche is open as not all remain open in the evening , or begin early enough in the morning . 

  Places may be restricted to certain days , and the crche may be closed in the school holidays . 

  The competition for places may be fierce where all employees have access to facilities . 

  The crche may be located some distance away from where you will be working , and some have restrictions as to how far away you are allowed to be from your child in case you need to be contacted . 

  Your child's age will also matter , as there are usually a restricted number of places for babies under one year , depending on the number of qualified nursery nurses available and the design and nature of the building itself . 

  It has been known for staff to accept offers of jobs on the assumption that crche places and hours will be organised to fit around the duties of employees . 

  This can not be taken for granted , however , and it is worth fending off inevitable disappointment by making enquiries before signing any contract of employment . 

  Transport 

  If you intend to travel by public transport then do check the reliability of local operators . 

  Since deregulation of bus services some routes may have been altered or replaced . 

  This can matter if you expect to be working late and the bus stage is some distance away from your place of work . 

  You may not want to walk down lonely streets or dark paths alone at the end of a day's work . 

  It may be possible to share a taxi with colleagues on a regular basis or arrange a lift home . 

  Inter-hospital transport may be able to take you part of the way home , or at least take you to a main thoroughfare away from dark corners . 

  If you intend to live in a house provided by the local health authority they may be prepared to arrange transport for you . 

  If you intend to live in a staff hostel you may be able to call upon a member of the hospital security staff . 

  Hospitals in inner city areas are sometimes protected by security staff who have an additional responsibility for the safety of residents in staff accommodation . 

  You may intend to get to work by car or bicycle . 

  If you go by car then you should check on the availability of car parking , as nurses are not generally considered a priority in this respect . 

  Security can also be a problem here , so try to park in highly visible places which are less likely to be jammed by visitors' cars just as you want to get home . 

  Bicycles should have a reliable padlock and carry some form of identification , preferably a police stamp . 

  Your local police station should be able to mark your bike for you . 

  It is worth estimating potential transport costs in advance and setting these against your anticipated income . 

  If you find you have to put a car on the road purely for your job's sake , by the time you have included petrol , road tax and insurance , plus an allowance for depreciation , that you may be better off working closer to home . 

  Community nurses and health visitors are paid a mileage allowance but you will also want to know who pays for what if you should break down or have an accident , and whether you can claim an allowance against income tax for general depreciation . 

  Crown cars are used less and less these days , other than in very rural areas . 

  Occasionally you may be asked to share a Crown car with colleagues or even health authority employees from another department . 

  This can lead to occasional problems over who has priority . 

  Check this in advance with your service manager so that you do not risk being caught out when you are in a hurry . 

  Accommodation 

  Since the 1983 Rayner Scrutiny of NHS residential accommodation there has been a steady rationalisation of accommodation provided for DHA employees , and this has added to problems for recruiters , especially in areas where private rented accommodation is expensive and in short supply . 

  The sale of land and properties sited in prime development areas has led to a shortage of suitable housing for staff , particularly in the South East of England . 

  Certain categories of staff have more chance of being offered accommodation , but this may be limited to single applicants living a reasonable distance from the parental home . 

  Preference is generally given to nursing students in their first year of training , and " younger " staff working in hard to recruit areas . 

  Your employer has no legal or even moral obligation to house you , although they may advise you on what is available locally in the public and private sector . 

  For advice on buying a DHSS house or flat , on district council and housing association schemes and on special schemes ('hard to let' and low cost home ownership ) consult No Fixed Abode : NHS housing , a Guide to your Rights and Options . 

  This is a campaign booklet which I prepared for the RCN's Association of Nursing Students in 1985 ; much of it also applies to returning nurses . 

  Care of dependents 

  The noun " dependent " is an ugly label , implying that a person exists only in relation to another person . 

  Unfortunately it now enjoys common usage in social services parlance , and I use it here principally as an umbrella term for those people you may be close to , and have some responsibility for , be they elderly or disabled relatives or friends , children or other family members . 

  A great many nurses care for dependent parents or grand-parents , and have to juggle their own personal and family needs around long-term commitments . 

  It may be the loss of a partner or the onset of mental illness in a parent which first causes a nurse to give up a successful career in order to care full-time at home . 

  When considering the future of a chronically sick , disabled or frail person it is inevitably the nurse in the family to whom everyone turns . 

  Expectations are high , the assumption often being that the vocation experienced by the person who enjoys nursing can be satisfied closer to home . 

  Although for some this may be acceptable as a labour of love , for others it can become an intolerable burden , particularly if the dependent relative or companion is unappreciative or fails to acknowledge the sacrifices being made on their behalf . 

  Guilt or resentment on either side can erode an otherwise loving relationship . 

  Whether you are married or single , man or woman , the pressure to fulfil your " obligations " is strong . 

  Different cultures have different attitudes to such obligations ; for some it is merely an extension of an already extended family . 

  The British tendency to choose to limit the size of families over the past 20 years , and the need to move around the country in search of better job prospects , has done little to increase the sense of community and neighbourliness which once absorbed so much of the responsibility for mutual support and so-called " informal " care in the post-war years . 

  Demands on social services to provide support are rising steadily as are those made on voluntary groups and organisations who strive to support both carer and cared for with the limited financial and physical resources they have available . 

  Assistance from the community nursing service , social workers and day or respite facilities can relieve some of the pressure on carers but do not provide any long term solution to the attendant social and emotional deprivation of people living restricted and sometimes insular existences . 

  Years away from clinical nursing can sap the confidence of nurses so that when an opportunity to return to work does come along , individuals feel inhibited from trying to re-establish their careers . 

  Some enlightened and forward-thinking employers are already beginning to recognise this potential manpower re-source for both full and part-time staff . 

  The experience and resilience of such nurses will be much in demand , not necessarily solely at the qualified nurse level , as the reforms of nursing education begin to be implemented in the early 1990s ( see chapter 5 ) . 

  The need to harness and utilise such skills becomes an urgent priority if the NHS is to survive the recruitment and retention crisis so talked about in the late 1980s . 

  Those responsible for recruiting qualified nurses back into practice should be in the business of welcoming back all staff who have expressed an interest in returning , regardless of age or length of break in service . 

  From my own experience , service breaks of 15-20 years are not at all unusual , although older candidates do tend to underestimate the value of their past experience , apologising for personal inadequacies which , on further examination , do not exist . 

  Such nurses need to benefit from an individual appraisal and assessment of their experience and skills so that re-entry becomes a natural progression for them rather than a hurdle to be jumped . 

  In evaluations of the length of time spent on supervised clinical allocation before employment , the vast majority of course tutors said that course members felt that time allowed was inadequate , and would happily have continued for longer . 

  Regardless of the amount of time involved it seems likely that staff will always opt for more time if this is offered to them . 

  As one tutor put it : " The temptation to put off the evil day is irresistible for most people . 

  I have to re-affirm the confidence they are only beginning to find in themselves . " 

  Alternatives in respite care 

  If you care for a relative or close friend on a long-term basis and feel unable to return to full-time work it may still be possible to make alternative arrangements in order to work for one or more days or nights a week . 

  Other members of the family may be able to share care by helping out on alternative days or weeks , or over a two day period once a month , so that you can attend a back to nursing course . 

  Some courses run at weekends or in the evenings , and some during school hours . 

  A popular shift for returning district nurses is the twilight shift -- assisting patients into or out of bed -- although this may not be what you want for the rest of your life . 

  Residential homes and hostels can accommodate nurses who can only work awkward hours , and who can cover for staff sickness and annual leave . 

  Many voluntary organisations run social and rehabilitation centres which provide stimulating and interesting activities for people confined to home at other times in the week . 

  If you have a sympathetic employer and GP you could see whether the person you care for would like to come to work with you but spend one or two days a week on a regular basis in a day centre run by the DHA . 

  Social work departments should have details of any local centres and activities , but of course much depends on your relative's wishes and personal preferences . 

  You would probably both benefit in the long term by coming to such a compromise as interests and contacts from outside can save you both from the trapped feeling that a dependent relationship can bring about . 

  Alternatively you can employ someone to care for your relative at home . 

  Local volunteer schemes may be able to arrange a regular visitor or you could contact an employment agency or advertise for a kindly " sitter " . 

  The rates of pay which an agency may require vary and are dependent on whether you want someone qualified . 

  Paying another nurse while you nurse yourself may sound dotty , but if both you and your relative can maintain a sense of independence and broaden your outlook on life it may be a worthwhile investment . 

  Placing an advertisement for someone kind and responsible to help may sound an unlikely way to find reliable help but it can have very satisfying results . 

  Early or semi-retired people or housewives looking for a break often welcome a different four walls and a fresh interest . 

  If you have not been in touch recently then do contact your GP and health visitor and discuss possibilities with them . 

  If it is not possible to attend a back to nursing course there are various distance learning packages available which can be studied successfully at home . 

  They need not necessarily be any more expensive than enrolling on a course . 

  Even though they are no substitute for practical experience they can at least familiarise you with current terminology and introduce you to contemporary nursing philosophies . 

  Community mental handicap and mental health teams are now much more geared to supporting carers as well as clients , and would be glad to offer any help they can . 

  If you have struggled alone for some time you may be pleasantly surprised at what is now available to you . 

  Contact your local community health council by letter or telephone and ask to be put in touch with whoever is responsible for your area . 

  This may be easier in the long run than trying to hack your way through the jungle of your local community health or social services departments . 

  CHCs are very consumer oriented and can provide an enormous range of explanatory leaflets and basic information . 

  Alternatives in child care 

  If you have exhausted the possibility of an employer's crche facility then you may want to consider the alternatives , which are usually childminding or employing a nanny or au pair . 

  Reciprocal arrangements with another nurse or friend can work -- so long as you are flexible and no money exchanges hands , but if you have a child under five and payment is involved then your " childminder " will either have to register with the local authority ( that is if she cares for your child in the minder's own home ) or be employed as a nanny in yours . 

  If you can find someone like yourself who is in the same position then this can be an ideal arrangement . 

  Not only do you go to work knowing that your child is in safe hands , but you have a ready made friend , sympathetic listener and companion for you and your child all in one neat package . 

  The potential saving compared to paying for a childminder can be considerable ; more so for a nanny . 

  Shared nannies are becoming more popular and other children can provide stimulation and company if yours is an only child . 

  Local branches of the National Childbirth Trust are a good source of information on nanny shares . 

  The costs of employing even a shared nanny , however , should be thoroughly investigated beforehand . 

  Rates in London and the South East may be prohibitive as qualified nannies ( NNEBs ) are much in demand but in short supply . 

  Women in better paid jobs can negotiate better conditions especially for nannies who live in . 

  Au pairs' hours have to be fitted around language classes and travelling and so are unlikely to fit in with yours , unless you are prepared to compromise a great deal and have the energy after work to deal with the appalling homesickness experienced by young people living far from home . 

  Finding a suitable registered childminder is probably the only option available to most of you as even the best nursery schools and crches can seldom offer the kind of hours you are likely to need throughout school holiday periods . 

  If you have children of school age you may be able to depend on a neighbour , relative or friend to do the necessary fetching and carrying and occasional early suppers . 

  Substitute " grannies " sometimes advertise their services in local newspapers or shop windows , and can be reliable . 

  If you do rely on a friend or neighbour on a fairly relaxed and informal basis it is worth showing them some appreciation occasionally , a return of favours or a thoughtful gift . 

  Being taken for granted is the biggest cause of disillusionment with this kind of relationship and a sincere gesture every now and again can help to keep it sweet . 

  Lists of registered childminders can be obtained from the under-fives adviser employed by the social services department . 

  Under the Child Minders Regulations Act of 1948 a person caring for reward for one or more children under five years of age to whom they are not related is required to be registered with the local authority . 

  The childminder will be investigated for any previous criminal convictions and have her home inspected for cleanliness , adequate space and " reasonable safety " . 

  Such inspections are theoretically repeated every two or three years , although I have come across some childminders who have not received a follow up visit for several years . 

  It is up to parents to satisfy themselves as to the suitability of a childminder , and the social services department are not likely to want to become involved over minor issues . 

  They will want to know about a childminder who fails to provide a safe environment or where children appear to be neglected or ill cared for . 

  The arbiter of taste in this instance has to be parents themselves , and much can be done to avoid unhappy experiences from the outset by determining preferences and approaches to the care of your child when your childminding arrangement begins . 

  The actual payment at time of writing is between 1.50 and 1.70 per hour per child , but with a possible reduction for any second and subsequent child . 

  This may include meals but not of the kind or quality you may prefer . 

  You can choose to take packed lunches for your child if you want to . 

  The best child-minders are usually well known in the area and come recommended by friends or colleagues . 

  Those who are new to childminding can take a while to become established , however , so do not assume several vacancies to be a reflection on the childminder herself . 

  Professional jealousy between childminders is quite common , and so it is worth getting an independent opinion if you find one minder putting down another without evidence of a good cause . 

  It is worth discussing your child's needs in detail and having a few rehearsal sessions before committing yourself to a job . 

  Do not do as I did and arrange to work only to find that the childminder changes her mind within the first few days . 

  Ask to see your childminder's certificate of registration and find out how many other children she will be caring for in addition to yours . 

  Does she employ extra help if necessary ? 

  How much space and what kind of play equipment does she have ? 

  What is her attitude towards tantrums or bad behaviour and what action would she take on your behalf ? 

  Make your requirements on such things as physical punishment , sweet eating and so on clear from the outset . 

  Is she approachable and easy to talk to , or do you find yourself apologising to her for forgetting things or because your child has heaps of energy ? 

  Does your child have an unusual and relevant medical history , such as convulsion or allergies , and would she know what to do in an emergency ? 

  Inconsistencies can be very confusing for young children and conflicting attitudes over toilet training and discipline can lead to frustration and unhappiness . 

  Always leave details of where you can be contacted -- even if you only intend to be away from your usual number for a few hours -- and provide your child's full name , date and place of birth , and your GPs name , address and telephone number . 

  An organised childminder may well ask you to complete a form giving such relevant details , and should at least ask you for them . 

  When you are satisfied that your child is happy and cared for then do not hesitate to make the most of a good childminder . 

  The rate of pay is such that she must be genuinely fond of children to want to put up with them day after day ! 

  Single parents may find that they have priority over places in state run nurseries . 

  If you are in this position and you want to return to work it is worth making enquiries of your health visitor or the local authority under-fives adviser . 

  References 

  Recommended reading 

  The Back to Nursing Movement and Prospective Employers 

  The back to nursing movement has established itself over the past five years , partly in response to a national shortage of qualified staff , and partly as a result of the UKCC's stated commitment to introduce mandatory updating programmes for nurses and health visitors returning to practice after a specified minimum break in service . 

  Initiatives on recruitment and retention of staff were highlighted by a major national campaign run jointly by the Department of Health and Nursing Times in 1988 . 

  Director of nursing policy and practice at the RCN , Derek Dean , addressed hard-pressed managers in his book Manpower Solutions published by the RCN in 1987 . 

  In his advice on " bringing back the lost " , he targeted two groups for re-employment ; those who had originally left nursing because they were " uninterested for one reason or another " , and those who had left to have children . 

  He pointed to demographic changes in the population , a lack of competitiveness among health authorities as a labour market , and a labour turnover in which the profession renews itself numerically every six years as part of the explanation for the shortfall in establishment figures . 

  The declining number of nurses in training leading to a reduced output of qualified staff , fewer 18-year-olds as a pool for recruitment , and a massive retention problem in London all contributed to a need for concerted action , he stressed . 

  In calling for an " unprecedented management " initiative to offset the effects of reduced staffing levels , Derek Dean did not mince words : " It is not an over statement to say that a crisis is imminent and can only be averted if action is taken by all concerned as a matter of extreme urgency . " 

  The evidence to date is that DHAs and independent sector employers are taking Derek Dean's predictions seriously , and are preparing to defuse the demographic time bomb by revamping their image to attract the attention of potential returners , and by setting up re-entry schemes which will help to instil confidence in staff who feel nervous about coping with new and demanding roles . 

  Nursing agencies have often been the means to re-entry in the past , and they too are having to adapt to new forces at work which for them could represent a consumer boom . 

  Preparing for your return 

  The chances are that you belong to one of the groups Derek Dean has identified . 

  Your motivation and skills have already been considered in the previous chapters . 

  What you need to know about now is how to bring your practice and your registration status up to date , and the different routes of re-entry available to you . 

  The law and re-entry programmes 

  As this book goes to press ( April 1989 ) there is no law which requires nurses or health visitors formally to update their practice before re-entry . 

  Significant moves have been made towards introducing such a requirement in the near future , however , and it would be prudent to take account of these when planning your return . 

  UKCC guidelines of good practice 

  Charged with the setting up of a central UK single professional register of nurses , midwives and health visitors , and mindful of its responsibilities for enhancing professional standards , the UKCC first began looking at the issue of mandatory refreshment for nurses and health visitors while still a shadow body in 1982 . 

  Following the report of its working group , recommendations concerning this were passed on to the newly appointed UKCC on its inception in July 1983 . 

  Having considered this report the Council went on to state its commitment to the provision of approved re-entry programmes in its first annual report of December 1984 . 

  A period of consultation with the professions followed , and in May 1986 the UKCC published an important document entitled Guidelines For Good Practice -- Return to Practise Programmes for Nurses and Health Visitors . 

  Those employers who were already geared to providing some form of re-entry course for returning nurses then had the benefit of these guidelines to work from , and began adapting their course objectives and outcomes to the recommended UKCC criteria . 

  The document clearly helped employers to identify what they hoped to achieve by running such programmes , and sowed the seeds which will eventually culminate in a nationally recognised curriculum in the future . 

  A further consultation paper issued by the UKCC in September 1988 took proposals a stage further . 

  Responses to a questionnaire sent to NHS authorities in March 1988 had shown that only 8 per cent of employers requires nurses and health visitors to undertake re-entry programmes before employment , even though individuals might have had substantial breaks in service . 

  Eager to build on the positive response to the earlier guide-lines , and to impress on employers their collective responsibilities in assisting returners to practise safely , the UKCC put forward the following proposals for consideration : 

  " following a break in practice from a post requiring a nursing or health visiting qualification of three ( since modified to five ) years or more , a re-entry programme will be required in order for a person to return to practice " . 

  The minimum length of such a re-entry programme should be set at 144 hours throughout the UK . 

  On completion of a suitable programme outcomes based on up to date knowledge of practice of nursing or health visiting must be achieved by a returning nurse or health visitor . 

  ( These outcomes had already appeared in draft outline in the earlier Guidelines , but were now modified and revised following the response to consultation . ) 

  Courses offered should be provided by employing authorities on a full or part-time basis , and could include appropriate distance learning material . 

  To ensure that a minimum UK standard is met , the National Boards should undertake the approval of programmes . 

  Provision for re-entry programmes should be linked with periodic relicensing to ensure safe practice . 

  Certain changes in the rules contained in the Nurses' , Mid-wives' and Health Visitor's Act ( 1979 ) are needed to make updating a legal requirement , and these must be put before Parliament as with any law reform . 

  Given the remaining time left open for consultations within the professions and the time needed to enact rule changes , the requirement is unlikely to reach the statute books before 1990 . 

  The other thorny issue to be addressed is that of course funding . 

  At present many courses are funded by DHAs , while the cost of others is met by returners themselves . 

  Much depends on the length of courses and how comprehensive they are . 

  The cost of evening courses or those consisting of a few sessions in a school of nursing cost considerably less than residential week long courses or part-time variations held over a period of several months . 

  The wide range of courses in terms of content and timespan presumably reflects the budget and teaching staff available and the demand created by service needs ( notably shortage of staff in specific areas ) , and the needs expressed by interested applicants . 

  As employers respond to the guidelines set out by the UKCC then parity of courses will emerge and budgets for courses will need to be arrived at in response to local situations . 

  If employers are to be expected to meet the cost then they ( and the Department of Health ) will have to be convinced that moneys invested in providing programmes will have a worth-while outcome in terms of better recruitment and retention of staff . 

  The UKCC has the moral high ground : it can argue that such courses must be funded in order to ensure safe practice and to protect the vulnerable public from nurses or health visitors whose practice is out of date and potentially dangerous . 

  Certainly various options in providing funds will have to be looked at , and some agreement reached if mandatory refreshment is to become a reality . 

  In practice many returners already pay some contribution towards courses . 

  In my early research for this book it was evident that where applicants paid a fee to attend a course , the attendance and completion figures were significantly higher than where courses had been provided free of charge . 

  Some assistance has been provided by local sponsorship and training grants ( formerly from the Manpower Services Commission ) have been made available . 

  The independent sector has also contributed to developments in the area by setting up courses aimed at recruiting staff back to work . 

  Estimates of the number of returning nurses are difficult to gauge accurately on an annual yearly basis , although the UKCC has placed an educated guess through manpower enquiries at 2500 a year . 

  Whether or not you will be asked to pay for your course remains at the discretion of course organisers and managers , therefore , and I am unable to give any hard and fast guidance here , other than to say that they will have to be kept at a reasonable level to be affordable , particularly by those who have been unemployed or bringing up a family . 

  Although at the moment it is up to you to decide what form of updating you would like to undertake , it would be useful to look at any developments in your area aimed at your special interest , and to find out from employers what they might expect from you in advance of offering you a job . 

  Advice on how to go about this appears later in this chapter . 

  I would first like to explain your obligations on an issue which has caused a great deal of concern and confusion for returners by being made to appear much more complicated than it actually is . 

  Periodic fees and re-licensing 

  In July 1983 the UKCC single professional register absorbed the registers and rolls formerly administered by the General Nursing Councils . 

  Records in England and Wales and Northern Ireland , however , still held the names and addresses of many who had long ceased to practise , some of them no longer alive , and so the records as they stood could not be described as " live " . 

  In a massive postal exercise the UKCC updated these records . 

  You may have received a letter from them early in 1984 asking for up to date details . 

  From January 1987 a system of periodic licensing was introduced , whereby nurses , midwives and health visitors wishing to remain on the SPR , and so maintain their eligibility to practise , must pay a periodic fee every three years . 

  This keeps the register " live " and provides a steady income for the UKCC , so helping it to move towards financial independence from government subsidy . 

  So even though you may have paid what you thought was a once and for all registration fee on qualifying prior to 1983 , if you wish to remain eligible to practise you are now required to update your registration status with the Council if you have not already done so . 

  At the time of writing the fee stands at 30 for a three year period . 

  If for some reason the UKCC has not caught up with you then you can write to the Registration Department , , and you will be sent standard forms to complete . 

  Depending on your employment situation and the length of time you have had away from nursing you may be asked to provide a character or employer's reference . 

  On payment of the requisite fee your qualifications will be validated and your up to date details recorded on the SPR . 

  Once your registration status is up to date you will be sent a plastic card containing your name and Personal Identification Number ( PIN ) and it is this card which constitutes evidence of your " licence to practise " . 

  When you apply for a job , your prospective employer will ask you to produce this card so that he may be satisfied of your eligibility to practise . 

  One of the advantages of such a card over paper qualifications and former GNC registration badges is the protection it offers against the possibility of fraudulent use . 

  Scotland has enjoyed a system of periodic relicensing prior to the appointment of the new statutory bodies in 1983 , and so those of you previously registered with the GNC for Scotland will already be familiar with the practice of periodic relicensing , and will be quite accustomed to what has become the subject of some controversy south of the border . 

  New titles for nurses , midwives and health visitors 

  Table 4.1 illustrates the new titles for those entered on the constituent parts of the UKCCs Single Professional Register . 

  These were introduced in July 1983 when the new statutory bodies for the professions came into being . 

  Practitioners may use former titles as a matter of courtesy , although this is becoming less usual . 

  All those entered on parts 1 , 3 , 5 , 8 and 9 of the SPR are now described as first level practitioners , while those entered on parts 2 , 4 , 6 and 7 are described as second level practitioners . 

  The professional competencies required of first and second level nurses are commensurate with the level and duration of initial nurse training , and these are examined more closely in Chapter 7 when discussing changes in nursing practice generally . 

  Registered health visitors must have a first level qualification in order to undertake postbasic health visitor training . 

  Those entered as registered midwives may be first level trained nurses who have gone on to take additional postbasic training as a midwife , or may be direct entrants to midwifery , in which case their qualification is at first level . 

  Linking re-entry to relicensing 

  By the early 1990s it is envisaged that nurses and health visitors wishing to relicense will have to provide evidence of either current employment requiring a nursing qualification or the successful completion of a re-entry programme approved by the National Board of their country of practice . 

  In this way the UKCC not only keeps a " live " register of practising professionals , but ensures that they are not placed in the vulnerable position of attempting to give care without sufficient up to date theoretical and practical knowledge . 

  Standards of care should therefore be safeguarded and protected and the possibility of nurses being inadequately prepared for their roles should reduce dramatically . 

  Table 4.1 The Single Professional Register ( SPR ) 

  Approval of current re-entry programmes 

  The curricula and finer details of National Board approved programmes still have to be fully considered and agreed . 

  This does mean that re-entry or back to nursing courses presently operating will not necessarily be approved retrospectively for the purpose by the National Boards . 

  Any course you choose to undertake before updating is made mandatory may not later satisfy the Boards if you decide to delay return to nursing or health visiting in the meantime . 

  The likelihood is that if a current course meets the UKCC's criteria then the National Board may consider an exemption from the new rules , although this again will have to be allowed for in legislation . 

  The problem is that the Boards would have great difficulty in assessing the standard of a course retrospectively , particularly if it has had no dealings with it previously . 

  If you do not intend to return to nursing employment in the near future , then you can only remain as up to date with nursing theory as possible in anticipation of your planned return , and hope that the evidence you eventually provide of recent study is sufficient to convince the Board of your readiness to return . 

  It would still do you no harm to attend a re-entry programme in the meantime , as it will give you a taste of current nursing practice , and help you in deciding exactly what you would like to do in the future . 

  Course supervision 

  The best action open to you at the moment is to undertake a re-entry course which conforms to the criteria outlined in the UKCC's Guidelines for Good Practice . 

  The National Boards will probably oversee and approve their own courses once a formula for these has been finalised for standard and content by the UKCC . 

  However , each National Board will wish to evolve re-entry programmes with their own country's needs and priori-ties in mind , and this may be reflected in the modus operandi of individual boards , and the considerable amount of time and discussion which will no doubt take place in advance of reaching a UK wide agreement . 

  Scotland , for instance , already has a flourishing and well-established system of continuing education and personal development for those already practising . 

  the demographic differences for instance in recruitment and retention problems reflects the number and nature of re-entry programmes held in different parts of the UK . 

  The present trend of setting up courses only in response to staff shortages will be superseded in the future by any forthcoming legal requirement , and so the administration of courses and the rationale behind them will have to change accordingly . 

  The existence of a firm strategy for continuing education may , in theory , preclude the need for re-entry programmes as they exist at present , and it is the job of the members of each National Board to align continuing education needs with the UKCC's own policies regarding the maintenance and improvement of professional standards as laid down in current legislation . 

  Whatever is ultimately decided by the boards and the UKCC it is still in your own and your patients interests for you to undertake some form of formal updating , even if for the moment this is left to your own and your employer's discretion . 

  Before going on to look at re-entry and back to nursing courses in detail I would like to consider alternative routes of re-entry available to you first . 

  Alternative routes of re-entry 

  There are several routes open to qualified nurses and health visitors , although these will be limited if you wish to remain within one area of clinical practice . 

  These include returning : 

  Via a back to nursing or re-entry programme organised by your local health board or district health authority . 

  This is unlikely to guarantee you a post on completion , but most employers will be happy to discuss possible openings or vacancies with you , subject to satisfactory references and your suitability as assessed at personal interview . 

  Via a back to nursing course organised by a nursing employment agency . 

  Employment opportunities will be discussed at some time during or before the course . 

  Some agencies may waive the fee if you register with them on completion of a course . 

  Via full or part-time work in a private nursing or rest home , or as a resident or non-resident nurse in an independent school or college . 

  Via a post working privately in the patient's own home . 

  Via a residential post in a community house , hostel or institution . 

  Via work arranged for you by a nursing agency . 

  Via registering for work with a nurse " bank " in the NHS or in the independent sector . 

  Via full or part-time employment in the NHS , but without completing a re-entry course prior to take up such employment . 

  Via work in charitable organisations and institutions . 

  Via private clinics . 

  Via working as a practice nurse in a GP surgery or group practice . 

  Via employers abroad . 

  Via teaching or research in tertiary and higher education establishments . 

  Via retraining for a new specialty requiring your original qualification for entry . 

  Via work in occupational health nursing in industry or commercial organisations . 

  Via employment in the independent health sector , which includes hospices and charitable trusts as well as large hospitals and hospital corporations . 

  This list is not intended to be exhaustive , and certainly does not include areas where your nursing qualification is used indirectly , such as working as a children's nanny or as a sales representative for a pharmaceutical or product manufacturer . 

  Before making a decision about your preferred route of re-entry it is useful to study the desired outcomes for nurses and health visitors completing a re-entry programme suggested by the UKCC . 

  Given the length of your own break in service , and any efforts you have made to update yourself in any or all of these areas , would you feel confident to return to practice tomorrow ? 

  Most of you will probably want to qualify your answers . 

  If you have been out of nursing or health visiting for six months or less you may feel that completing a formal course is a waste of valuable time which might be more profitably spent in reorientation to your new job . 

  If you have accepted a job offer it is still worth enquiring whether there are any local " refresher " courses operating as part of in-service and continuing education . 

  You may be able to arrange day or shorter release periods for any study days or short courses relevant to your practice which would also help to bring you up to date . 

  Do not take a job on the basis of a vague letter of appointment . 

  Examine and agree on a job description first and a contract of employment which you are satisfied with and understand . 

  For advice regarding clinical grading see chapter 2 . 

  Remember to take out professional indemnity insurance against any possible action for negligence or malpractice and see whether there are any professional organisations or societies which serve your clinical area . 

  Continuing education tutors and nursing librarians are a good source of information on special interest groups and forums , as are the journals . 

  Appendices at the end of this book will provide you with some contact names and addresses . 

  If you do not feel ready yet to return to practice without attending a re-entry programme there is no need to feel inferior or cowardly compared with friends who are more confident . 

  What follows is general advice applicable to either group on finding information about job and training opportunities , and on responding to local recruitment drives . 

  Return to practice and re-entry programmes 

  Where to find help and information 

  At the time of writing there is no central source or register of information regarding re-entry programmes . 

  Advice on continuing education is available from several organisations and these may have to be approached individually in order to put together a picture of opportunities available to you locally . 

  The situation on provision and supervision of re-entry courses is unique to each member country of the UK , and so what follows is advice relevant to your country of intended practice . 

  There is no reason at present why you can not take a course in one country even though you intend to take up a job elsewhere . 

  The approach to such provision is not yet uniform , however , and so entry requirements and any formal assessment of your competence at the end of the course may differ according to local recommendations and practices . 

  Scotland 

  For information on re-entry courses in Scotland write to : ( telephone ) . 

  Advice on courses provided by individual health boards and colleges of nursing can be obtained from this address , but if you have a particular query concerning local provision you can either contact your local college of nursing direct , or write to the chief nursing officer at your local health board for clarification . 

  The Health Service Centre should be your first port of call for all general career enquiries as it disseminates information on both basic and postbasic nursing education . 

  The careers centre has a library which is open to nurses and other health service staff . 

  Opening hours are Monday to Friday from 9am to 5pm at the address given above . 

  Wales 

  For information on re-entry courses available in Wales you are advised to contact your local district health authority . 

  If you have difficulty in obtaining the information you want then write to : or to . 

  England 

  For advice on courses available in England write to : . 

  A process of rationalisation and joint initiatives with establishments of higher education makes identifying local schools and centres of nurse education quite difficult unless you are familiar with local mergers and health authority politics . 

  If you are familiar with your local school of nursing then you can write directly either to the director of nurse education or to the tutor for postbasic education based at the school . 

  Northern Ireland 

  If you would like to undertake a course in Northern Ireland you are advised to contact the director of nurse education at your local college of nursing , or write to the chief administrative nursing officer at your local health board for details of local initiatives . 

  Non NHS courses 

  Details of courses for returners organised by nursing agencies or commercial conference organisations appear in the national weekly nursing press from time to time and in local newspapers . 

  Courses may also be advertised in local jobcentres and public libraries or on the display boards of local employment agencies . 

  Some agencies may also circulate details to nurses currently registered with them . 

  Appropriate terminology 

  The formal title given to back to nursing courses is " return to practice programme " or " re-entry programme " as advised by the UKCC . 

  The actual title of the course matters a lot less than the content , but a word of caution is necessary here to help you differentiate between programmes designed to prepare you for re-entry to the profession , and those which may be open to nurses currently practising , namely " refresher courses " . 

  Refresher courses are generally aimed at updating nurses in particular specialties or all nurses on one particular topic , such as wound care , nursing research or pharmacology . 

  Such courses may be of interest to you as a returner but they are not the same as re-entry programmes , and would not be recognised for the same purpose if you ever had to provide evidence of an updating course to your National Board . 

  Mandatory refreshment ( as in re-entry programmes ) for returning nurses and health visitors is a separate but related issue to refreshment of practitioners already in the service . 

  Employers are sometimes guilty of blurring or confusing the two . 

  Some hope to provide one kind of course with the intention of killing the two proverbial birds with one stone . 

  The learning needs of the two groups are quite distinct from each other , however , and you should take care to establish exactly what is on offer before accepting a place . 

  Refresher courses are usually one or two day affairs as opposed to a formally planned and evaluated re-entry course , and should not be used as a cheaper alternative to providing a structured re-entry programme . 

  Tailoring a course to meet your needs 

  Most employers will be only too happy to help you tailor your preparation for re-entry to your own learning needs and those of the job you hope to take up . 

  When applying for a place on a re-entry course keep the following questions in mind so that you can compare what is on offer to your own best advantage . 

  What are the specific aims of the course ? 

  Who is responsible for planning the course and how is it assessed ? 

  Do the hours fit in with your existing commitments ? 

  What fee is charged and must you finance this in whole or in part ? 

  Is it possible to have the fee reimbursed if you consequently take up employment/ register with the employer organising the course ? 

  Is there an organised syllabus ? 

  If so , what does it cover ? 

  Does the course take due regard of the UKCC's Guidelines for Good Practice ? 

  What support is available to you from tutors and other staff ? 

  What is the clinical content of the course ? 

  Is clinical practice supervised and formally assessed before course completion ? 

  Will you have an opportunity to meet nurses who have already completed a similar course whether they have returned to practice or not ? 

  What preparatory reading ( if any ) is expected of you prior to attending the course ? 

  How much private study is assumed in addition to attending the course ? 

  Does the course lead to a certificate of completion or competence and if so , what value would such a certificate have on the job market ? 

  Will job opportunities and interview skills be discussed at some time during the course ? 

  Will you be offered a contract of employment while attending the course , and what is your position regarding professional indemnity insurance while undertaking clinical practice allocations ? 

  Course content 

  The content of courses varies widely , and is usually arrived at by the demands of the service . 

  The course should be general in nature if it is to comply with UKCC criteria , but it may have an additional specialist component aimed at preparing nurses for work in different clinical settings . 

  Courses for health visitors provided by the HVA are geared much more to the needs of that group , and these are discussed on pages 67-9 . 

  At present re-entry programmes range from three evenings to six months' day release plus supervised practice , and so it is virtually impossible to list every variation on the theme here . 

  The difficulty for anyone returning after a break is gauging just how up to date the teaching methods and philosophies of care are in any one school of nursing . 

  It has been shown that some schools offer a rehash or revision programme based on pre-registration modules , while others prepare courses in line with the very latest developments available . 

  If you have not kept up with the nursing journals or have been out of practice for a long time then you will have to trust to luck or the recommendations of others as to the relevance and value of any course you choose to attend . 

  If returners are to be able to comply with the desired outcomes as defined by the UKCC's guidelines then the course offered would have to satisfy requirements set out in Table 4.2 . 

  If you study the UKCC's Code of Professional Conduct ( Appendix 1 ) you will see that the criteria for desired outcomes relates directly to what is expected of the registered nurse and health visitor . 

  They are also very closely related to the competencies required of registered nurse in the Nurses' Rules ( Nurses , Midwives and Health Visitors Act , 1979 ) . 

  These are reproduced in chapter 7 . 

  Taken together , all these requirements constitute a set of minimum professional standards by which individual practitioners can be assessed and judged . 

  It seems logical that the minimum required of any returning nurse or health visitor should be that of any other registered practitioner . 

  By satisfying the requirements of the UKCC Guidelines , therefore , your skills will be easily as good as any newly qualified nurse , and given any previous nursing experience you may have had , probably much better . 

  The implications for raising standards of care in the profession are tremendous if employing authorities can succeed in meeting the desired out-comes of the UKCC in centres throughout the UK . 

  If the course described to you seems to bear no relation to these criteria do make further enquiries . 

  It may be that a new course is still in the planning stages , or that what you want is offered at another local centre . 

  Some employers are only just getting round to formalising recruitment and retention policies - and all that goes with them -- it may be that you are one step ahead of them in attempting to update yourself appropriately . 

  It does no harm to let them know of your interest while a course is in preparation . 

  Some employers may not run courses for groups of returners but instead offer to help you plan a personal programme of study aimed at satisfying the same requirements . 

  These can be just as useful even if you do not have the benefit of an instant peer group with whom to celebrate or commiserate on your shared experience . 

  Table 4.2 According to the latest available information from the UKCC , it is proposed that on completion of a suitable programme , the following outcomes , which are based on up to date knowledge of the practice of nursing or health visiting , should be achieved by the nurse or health visitor in order to practise safely after a break in service : 

  Desired outcomes 

  1 

  The ability to initiate and carry out emergency procedures effectively and as appropriate . 

  2 

  The ability to measure accurately , record and understand the relevance of patient/ client data obtained by personal observation or through the use of equipment . 

  3 

  The ability to administer medicines safely . 

  4 

  An understanding of factors within the environment which relate to the safety of patients/ clients , their families/ friends and colleagues . 

  5 

  The ability to design , execute and evaluate plans of patient/ client care , based on appropriate models . 

  6 

  An understanding of the practitioner's educational role in relation to patients/ clients , relations/ friends and colleagues . 

  7 

  An understanding of the current issues and educational programmes which affect professional practice . 

  8 

  The ability to use appropriate communication skills in relation to patients/ clients , relatives , and other members of the care team . 

  9 

  An understanding of appropriate current legislation , guidelines , codes of practice and policies . 

  10 

  An understanding of the current structure of health and social services , resulting lines of authority and responsibility . 

  In order to meet these requirements it is expected that the programme will include both theoretical and practical components . 

  If you do intend to follow your own programme see whether you can find a " mentor " or other suitable person to whom you can go for encouragement and guidance when you need to , rather than attempting to battle it out on your own . 

  You can also ask to be put in contact with others in a similar position to yourself and if you want to you can always arrange to meet regularly or form a support group to discuss matters which are relevant to all of you in your day to day work . 

  Course contracts 

  Temporary contracts of employment may be offered to you if you attend a course which has a high clinical input . 

  Courses operating in this way tend to be held on a system of day release or modules which include actual shifts in wards or departments . 

  Employers may offer such contracts with a view to making them permanent once they are satisfied that you have completed the course successfully . 

  Take care to establish whether within the terms of such a contract you are considered part of the rostered qualified workforce , or whether you are to be treated as supernumerary . 

  The implementation of the 1988 Clinical Grading Review as outlined in chapter 2 is complex , and you will need to clarify your position as regards your entry point on the scale . 

  The grading should reflect the actual responsibilities of the job , and any additional qualifications and experience you bring to the job : follow the advice given on contracts and job descriptions generally and be careful to establish what the parameters of the contract are before you agree to it . 

  Re-entry programmes for health visitors 

  Courses aimed at community nurses and health visitors have been relatively late arrivals on the " back to nursing " scene . 

  A few are designed to take in aspects of all community specialties , including district nursing , community psychiatric nursing , community mental handicap nursing and health visiting . 

  They are run by DHAs and in general cost much less than those run by the Health Visitors' Association . 

  The latter's courses are , however , particularly geared to health visitors and school nurses , are residential and more intensive than courses offered by DHAs . 

  They are also apt to be more authoritative , having been planned and organised by a professional organisation which also has a very important role in labour relations . 

  The HVA has an on-going annual programme of continuing education courses available to health visitors and school nurses open to members and non-members . 

  It has also pioneered a two week residential course for returning health visitors which takes place on two separate weeks with time allowed for preparation and consolidation of practice in the interval between component parts ( Table 4.3 ) . 

  Details of planned courses and current fees are available from : ( telephone ) . 

  The HVA's annual study conference usually takes place in the autumn and this can provide members with a focus for current health visiting issues . 

  All HVA members receive a free monthly copy of the journal The Health Visitor . 

  There is an excellent library at HVA headquarters which can be utilised by post , and which does not close its doors to non-members as some other libraries do . 

  A substantial preparatory reading list of recent reports and other material of relevance to health visitors is available from the education officer at the HVA . 

  Subscriptions to the quarterly HVA " current awareness bulletin' may also be arranged by contacting her at the address given above . 

  Details of membership and annual subscriptions for health visitors and school nurses may be obtained by writing to the membership secretary at HVA headquarters . 

  Information and advice on health visiting as a career can be obtained from recruitment officers at the addresses given in Appendix 3 . 

  If you are a member of the RCN you can also write to the . 

  Specialist forums served by the Association include : Community Nurse Managers Forum ; District Nurses Forum ; Family Planning Nurses Forum ; Fieldwork Teachers/ Practical Fieldwork Teachers Forum ; Health Visitors Forum ; Liaison Nurses Forum ; Practice Nurses Forum ; School Nurses Forum . 

  Special interest groups include chest clinic nurses , coronary heart disease specialist nurses and tuberculosis visitors . 

  Table 4.3 Example of content of residential course for returning health visitors 

  Re-entry via a new nursing specialty 

  It is always possible to return to nursing by studying for a specialist qualification . 

  It is sometimes necessary to have previous experience in the clinical area before secondment on a clinical nursing studies course can be arranged , or for previous experience to have some direct relevance for future work . 

  For example , if you have ambitions to work as a district nurse it may help to have worked in the care of elderly or disabled people . 

  Voluntary work in the community can be just as useful as anything you may have done in a paid capacity . 

  Information on postbasic training leading to another first level qualification ( RNMH , RMN , RSCN , RGN ) is best obtained from nursing careers advisers ( addresses appear in Appendix 3 ) . 

  Help in finding your way around postbasic opportunities via clinical nursing studies courses and other aspects of career development can be found in Jill Baker's book What Next ? 

  If you are familiar with your local school or college of nursing then you can write to the director of nurse education for information on courses run , entry requirements and availability of places . 

  Finding the right job 

  Job fairs and forums 

  National job fairs or forums are held in different parts of the country to attract nurses into jobs of every possible variety . 

  Employers in both public and private sectors can hire exhibition " stands " with display boards advertising job opportunities on offer . 

  Talks and meetings on topics of interest to nurses looking for a change in career direction are held throughout the day , and personnel and recruitment officers make themselves available to answer questions and arrange interviews for interested applicants . 

  Such fairs are a great morale booster for any nurse who feels unappreciated . 

  Suddenly there are hundreds of people just waiting to improve her career prospects ! 

  Some career conventions have crche facilities arranged . 

  Recruitment videos are sometimes shown , and advisory sessions may include applying for jobs , interview techniques , and general issues related to job hunting . 

  Job fairs are usually very lively and informal , and you can roam at leisure , surveying what is on offer and gathering literature on jobs you might not have considered in the everyday run of things . 

  Admission is usually free . 

  Advance details are published in the nursing press ( see Figure 1 ) and local radio advertising is often used at the time of the event . 

  Local recruitment drives 

  These are usually much more modest affairs . 

  They may be advertised in local newspapers or on local radio . 

  Interested nurses may be invited to an informal gathering over coffee , or to a structured recruitment day addressed by speakers and rounding off with an open session devoted to local job vacancies . 

  Members of staff are often available for an informal chat , and this can be a golden opportunity to absorb the general atmosphere and the attitudes of prospective colleagues . 

  Such recruitment drives can be organised by NHS managers or employers in the private sector . 

  The latter can usually be distinguished by the more generous hospitality -- cheese and wine parties are very often the province of a nursing recruitment agency , or other private sector employer . 

  It is worth investigating all the opportunities on offer before coming to a decision . 

  The managers of nursing agencies have often had considerable experience in assisting nurses back into practice after a career break , and can be extremely helpful and conscientious in responding to any doubts and queries you may have . 

  The approachability of NHS authorities will largely be determined by their current recruitment situation . 

  In Scotland and Northern Ireland , for instance , the shortage of qualified staff simply does not exist on the same grand scale as in some parts of England , and central London particularly . 

  For this reason managers may be less experienced in dealing with returning nurses and health visitors . 

  If you intend to move to a new area to take up employment it is wise to do some homework on local factors affecting recruitment . 

  It may be that the cost of living and paying rent locally is prohibitive , or that the hospital is due for closure in the foreseeable future . 

  The standard of NHS accommodation available to trained staff is variable , and even if you are happy to put up with this in the short term , in the longer term it may have adverse effects on your personal life or hopes of a future career . 

  Figure 1 Sample career convention programmes ( Reproduced by kind permission of Nursing Times , from issue 9 November 1988 ) 

  I have met some very disillusioned nurses who responded to vigorous recruitment drives and travelled many miles from home , only to find that they were expected to live " in dilapidated , out of the way nurses " hostels with no hope of raising the funds for anything better in the vicinity . 

  Redundancy , too , can be a threat , particularly where large psychiatric or mental handicap hospitals are being sold off as property which is excess to requirement . 

  Be aware of these issues when attending an interview or open day , and never accept a post without seeing for yourself what is actually being offered . 

  Some employers recruit on the basis of interviews held in hotels as visiting recruitment forums . 

  Most of them are very reputable , but do be cautious about promises which sound too good to be true . 

  Jobcentres 

  Department of Employment Jobcentres have branches in most towns and cities and some may display nursing vacancies . 

  It appears to be at the discretion of each branch to decide how nursing vacancies are publicised . 

  I rang ten different Jobcentres on the same day , and received ten different responses ! 

  Most will usually be able to provide you with a contact name and address , but if this is no help , then you can contact the personnel officer at the district health authority's address . 

  Classified advertisements 

  Most private sector employers use the classified section of local and regional newspapers , and the national nursing press . 

  District health authorities may also produce their own regular bulletins prior to using the classifieds . 

  If you want a general survey of the job scene , Nursing Times leads the field . 

  Its classifieds cover NHS and non NHS appointments , plus jobs in higher education , research and industry . 

  Nursing agencies and overseas recruiters also advertise . 

  Nursing Standard produces handy supplements , which have recently included material on back to nursing , agency nursing , nursing in the independent sector , nursing abroad and working in London . 

  Your local nursing library may hold reference copies of these . 

  Prepare to be confused by the plethora of different job titles : unremitting reorganisation of the NHS and changes to the statutory framework for the nursing and midwifery professions have wrought havoc . 

  There is a book to be written on the identity crisis apparent in nurses who have been left to the mercy of all the changes , and you will be far from alone if you can not tell a facilitator from a patient services coordinator ! 

  Nurse banks 

  Nurse banks originated in hospitals which required a pool of available trained staff from which to draw in times of staff shortage . 

  Not all DHAs operate a bank , but those which do usually welcome applications from returners , and are happy to discuss your mutual requirements at an early stage . 

  You will be asked to state your preferred days and hours of work , and whether you are willing to be called upon at very short notice to cover for staff absence or other emergency . 

  Some nurses are very enthusiastic about the bank as a route of re-entry , as it enables you to sample different wards and departments and introduces you to new people . 

  You very soon become familiar with the layout of the hospital and its policies , and can perhaps identify one area where you might like to work permanently . 

  You may be asked to cover for staff sickness , or study leave , or find yourself particularly busy during peak holiday periods . 

  You must be prepared for all eventualities , however , and not find yourself being asked to take charge in an area where you have insufficient clinical knowledge and experience . 

  When you first apply to join the bank , make clear to your employer just how much responsibility you feel able to take , and discuss ways of improving your clinical and management skills to take on additional responsibilities . 

  If you agree to work in an area which is unfamiliar to you , discuss the role you will be expected to take with your nurse manager . 

  It may be that with adequate supervision and a period of reorientation it will not take very long to prepare yourself for a new role , but do take care to acknowledge your limitations , and to make known to your manager how these are likely to affect the care you give . 

  If you have another part-time job , or domestic commitments , then bank nursing can be a very flexible way of keeping up to date professionally . 

  Be sure to fill in time sheets correctly and to let your manager know as soon as possible if you are unable to work as arranged , or be available on call . 

  Even if you only work for a few hours a week , take out professional indemnity insurance . 

  COHSE , the RCN , and the HVA all offer indemnity insurance schemes , and your local steward should be able to provide you with specific written details of this . 

  ( Health visitors should contact their local HVA centre , or the labour relations department at headquarters . ) 

  Agency nursing 

  The old-fashioned , rather genteel , image of nursing employment agencies has been superseded by much more streamlined , commercially aware organisations run with a mixture of personnel expertise and crisis management . 

  They are often fiercely competitive , and have a vested interest in establishing a reputation for reliability to both employees and employers . 

  Many towns and cities have high street branches of the bigger agencies , while smaller operations may operate from more modest premises and be run individually or in partnership . 

  Agencies advertise locally in newspapers , and may carry regular advertisements in the national nursing press . 

  The term recruitment consultants does imply " high flyer " and this description may lead you to organisations with an interest in placing nurses in particular specialties , in management positions , or abroad . 

  The Nursing Agencies Forum at the RCN is evidence of the agencies' rise to respectability , and it is no longer the case that " those who can , do ; those who cannot , work for agencies " . 

  It is the agency's job to establish a good working relationship between employers and agency staff , and it is in your interests to promote this by fulfilling your obligations to both by working in a professional and reliable way . 

  When you first approach an agency check that they are registered as an employment agency with the local government authority . 

  Every reputable agency should display a certificate of registration for the benefit of the public and those who register with them . 

  Membership of the Federation of Recruitment and Employment Services Limited is a good sign , as FRES has a code of practice which ensures the right level and number of qualified recruitment staff to assist and advise you . 

  The code protects against misleading or unethical advertising and provides a surety that you are given full , written details of what registration with a particular agency involves . 

  Terms and conditions of employment , including rates of pay , should be discussed at the outset , together with your qualifications , past nursing experience and level of expertise , and availability for work . 

  Some agencies like you to wear their own distinctive uniforms . 

  Will you be provided with free uniforms , or do you have to purchase these for yourself ? 

  Enquire about your income tax position , as this will be influenced by what you earn with the agency plus any other part-time or freelance work . 

  If you elect to become self-employed you will have to let your local inland revenue office know . 

  Agency staff may be able to advise you about certain tax allowances , such as travelling expenses , uniform , indemnity insurance , subscriptions to the journals , and to a professional organisation . 

  Your main concern may be getting work in a post commensurate with your past experience and abilities . 

  Most agencies will discuss this with you before accepting a job on your behalf , and will be sympathetic to your needs . 

  Any agency which places you in an unviable or potentially dangerous position could be accused of negligence by delegation , and so it is equally not in their interests to place you inappropriately . 

  If you work regularly for one agency you may want to have your position and experience reviewed from time to time , so that future work you undertake can be constructive and part of bona fide career development . 

  Some enlightened agencies run back to nursing and refresher courses . 

  They will usually have to charge for these , but you may be reimbursed if you subsequently register with the agency or fulfil a certain number of hours working for the agency . 

  Occasionally agencies work under contract to one hospital or authority , and you may find yourself becoming a semi-permanent fixture in one post . 

  You may prefer the flexibility over hours this offers , but you should weigh the pros and cons regarding working for an NHS employer and sickness pay , holiday pay , pension , study leave and so on . 

  If you are offered a full-time post by an employer who has been introduced to you via a nursing agency , you should consider the etiquette and ethics involved of leaving the agency to go to work for one of their clients , thus depriving them of their commission from employers . 

  Read the small print of any agreement you have with an agency , and be honest with agency staff about your dilemma . 

  It is not unusual to be in this position , and it may be that there is an accepted procedure to follow in the eventuality of employers making you an offer . 

  Tony O'Malley , an experienced agency nurse , has the following general advice for anyone contemplating working for an agency : 

  " There are several problems a nurse returner might face when working for an agency , and it may be helpful to be aware of these in advance . 

  Nurses working for agencies may often be telephoned and asked to undertake an assignment that they do not feel very confident about . 

  The caller from the agency may plead and cajole you into agreeing to accept the job , especially if it is a last minute booking and they are desperate for someone . 

  " Nurses should be advised to resist such pressure and not be afraid to turn down any assignment which they feel may be outside their sphere of competence . 

  Do not give in to comments such as " You are very choosy " , or are " always turning down work " , or even " Do you really want to work ? " . 

  Remember that you are self employed and a free agent . 

  " It is the agency's responsibility to find you the type of work you have indicated that you are interested in . 

  If you only want certain types of work and your agency is not able to supply enough work to suit you , then feel free to register with other agencies at the same time . 

  Many agency nurses do this and it poses no problems . 

  " When you do accept an assignment from one agency , be sure to inform the other agencies that you will not be available for however long the accepted work takes . 

  This will be much appreciated because it saves agency staff time and effort in trying to find you work unnecessarily . 

  " It is also possible that an assignment you accept turns out to be different from what you had been led to believe . 

  This may be because the client has misinformed the agency , or has redefined your duties prior to your arrival . 

  I am aware of agency nurses who have turned up at a hospital expecting to work on a ward caring for elderly people , only to be sent to work in the intensive care unit . 

  It is also not uncommon for hospitals to request a number of nurses from an agency without detailing the areas the nurses will be required to work in until they report for duty . 

  It is wise to be alert to this , and to stand your ground if asked to work in an area which is beyond your present capabilities . " 

  Independent sector employment 

  When discussing the independent health sector , many nurses describe a one dimensional perception of what is involved , namely a private hospital , luxuriously furnished , with demanding clients and a price list to match . 

  The reality is in fact much much broader than this , and as you can see from the following list , there are a wealth of opportunities providing care and comfort for all sectors of the population . 

  Hospices . 

  Private clinics , ranging from gynaecological and fertility clinics to general practice , alcohol or drug dependency , dermatology , sports injury clinics . 

  Occupational health posts in industry , or large commercial companies , retail outlets and corporations . 

  Residential homes , including nursing and rest homes , community houses and hostels , children's homes . 

  Independent schools and colleges . 

  Private hospitals offering acute or long-term care . 

  Charity and consumer advice agencies . 

  Private home nursing . 

  Teaching and lecturing on a freelance basis . 

  Running employment agencies . 

  Large multi-national corporations in the USA and the Middle East . 

  Hospitals run by charitable trusts . 

  Staff training and development for private sector employers . 

  No list can be exhaustive , but it can give you an idea of the range of opportunities open to you . 

  Most private sector employers advertise locally and in the nursing press , although some may run recruitment drives of their own , or exhibit at a job fair . 

  The individual employer's attitude to returning nurses will probably be the major deciding factor for you , even if pay and conditions are high on the list . 

  Much will depend on the ability of the employer to offer you optimum conditions for job satisfaction . 

  If the staff : client ratio is low and the environment for care well equipped and attractive , -then you will have to measure this against the breadth of experience which represents your alternative within the NHS . 

  Study the non NHS sections of Nursing Times and Nursing Standard and this will give you the most up to date information on current vacancies . 

  Job applications and interviews 

  The procedure for job applications and interviews is well known to most returners and I have therefore assumed that you do not need detailed guidance on this . 

  Initial applications for jobs need not include a separate employment history ( curriculum vitae ) unless this is specifically requested in a job advertisement . 

  Most employers will only ask you to repeat this information in a standard application form anyway . 

  A tidy , polite letter of application expressing your interest , date and level of qualifications , and details of your most recent employment is all that is required in the first instance , together with evidence of your registration status . 

  If the job or employer is unusual , then it may be helpful to go into more detail in advance of your interview , simply to allow whoever is vetting your application to pick you out from the crowd . 

  As an employer myself I have often found the best employees to be the most straightforward on paper . 

  Those who promise great things do not always match up to their own or anyone else's expectations ! 

  References 

  Recommended reading 

  The NHS and its Mid-life Crisis 

  The cause of British nurses and nursing itself in the 1980s has been championed most consistently by Trevor Clay . 

  As general secretary of nursing's largest trade union and professional organisation , the Royal College of Nursing , he has succeeded more than any single politician or political agitator in raising the public's awareness of the critical role of nurses in maintaining the nation's health . 

  He has calmly continued to assert the nursing voice , adroitly altering the popular subservient image of the nurse to one of deep political and personal conscientiousness as the patients' advocate and closest ally . 

  Steering the RCN through the gravest provocation and confrontations -- over industrial action , inadequacy of resources , management reorganisations , and the latest debacle over the implementation of a new clinical grading structure -- he is strategically well placed to voice a considered opinion on the future of the profession in Britain as we enter the next decade . 

  In his book Nurses , Power and Politics , he charted the progress of the nursing cause , looking at issues of conscience , education , image and professionalism as the NHS prepared to celebrate its 40th anniversary . 

  Clay has no doubt that the nurse's professional life is compatible with being political : 

  Participation in the political life of the country is the alternative for individual nurses to the silent frustration of the past or industrial action ... . 

  Each day we spend working with people we see their needs and the services they deserve . 

  He urges nurses to look beyond the immediate frustration of not being able to give all that they would wish for today's patients , but to resolve as individuals to do " everything reasonable within our power and through our nursing organisations to make sure that tomorrow's people get the nurses and the nursing they deserve . 

  I am confident that together we can be a powerhouse for change . " 

  Trevor Clay retires in 1989 , sadly on the grounds of ill health , and his determination and incisive leadership is a very great loss to the profession . 

  His " powerhouse for change " is both optimistic and courageous , coming at a time of unprecedented change and innovation in the NHS . 

  Rapidly advancing technologies in health care and clinical practice taking place across the whole spectrum of medical , surgical and mental health specialties depend for their success to a large degree on the sufficiency of sound nursing skills and personnel . 

  Increasing and conflicting demands made on funds for NHS use tends to focus media interest on the service's shortcomings rather than its strengths . 

  Headlines describing the " mid life crisis " of the NHS have done little to promote its image as a positive and worthwhile employer . 

  As Dr David Owen says in his book Our NHS , by exploiting and accentuating the apparent weaknesses in the system , the media is at risk of endangering the survival of the whole service by making it unattractive to recruits of the right calibre and commitment : 

  Those who cynically exploit the current problems of the NHS and yet who purport to support its purpose ought to pause and reflect upon the effect of some of their activities in creating a mood of pessimism about its future . 

  The deficiencies of the NHS need to be dealt with away from the headlines ... 

  It is certainly true that the climate for attracting new recruits to the professions is not improved by continued reporting on the doom and gloom aspects of working in the NHS . 

  The rolling stone effect of perpetuating negative thinking , rather than positive constructive action , is to lower morale at a very critical and potentially exciting stage in the development of nursing . 

  Nursing into the 1990s 

  There is no doubt that by returning to nursing in the next decade you will be helping to prepare the profession for the enormous demographic and social challenges facing Britain in the 21st century . 

  The proposed reform of nurse education in the UK , which received approval in principle from the Conservative government in May 1983 , promises a period of tremendous upheaval as the delicate balance of educational and service priorities is carefully weighed and restructured . 

  But with upheaval comes renewal , and an unrivalled opportunity to grasp the nettle nursing's leaders have talked about for years : an opportunity to redefine and reshape the parameters of nursing itself . 

  Visions of the nurse practitioner of the future are ambitious and exciting . 

  In an effort to prepare nursing for meeting society's needs in the future , policy makers have challenged many of the traditional views and approaches of nurses who evolved in a very different social milieu , and instead identified a much broader role for the new practitioner aimed at improving standards of care available to the public . 

  The hope seems to be that nurses will be better prepared and better enthused to address the nursing needs of society without the shackles placed on them by an outmoded system of training . 

  Before going on to discuss the reforms known as Project 2000 , it might be valuable to describe the recently introduced statutory framework for nursing , midwifery and health visiting as a background to the report . 

  The current statutory framework for nursing , midwifery and health visiting 

  When the Nurses , Midwives and Health Visitors Act 1979 came into force in July 1983 , nine statutory bodies which had previously governed the professions were replaced by the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting -- and four National Boards , one for each constituent country , England , Northern Ireland , Scotland and Wales . 

  The UKCC is charged with responsibilities for establishing and improving standards of training and professional conduct . 

  It also maintains the Professional Register . 

  Registered nurses , midwives and health visitors of the four countries elect members to the National Boards every five years . 

  Additional members are appointed to the National Boards by the Secretary of State . 

  1979 Act requires the Board to identify seven of its members to serve on the UKCC . 

  The Secretary of State appoints directly 17 members to the UKCC . 

  Officers of the council and representatives from the Health Departments also attend council . 

  National Board members meet regularly to discuss and agree on matters relating to the provision of education and training and the implementation of policies at local level . 

  It is the job of the Boards to approve and advise institutions which provide programmes leading to registration as a nurse , midwife or health visitor , and to implement the UKCC's policy requirements . 

  There is a degree of autonomy within each of the four countries , and although they may unite in the same objectives ( such as improvements in educational and professional standards ) , each has to be responsive to the nature and demands of its country of origin . 

  Within the parameters of kind , standard and content of programmes studied by the UKCC the influence of elected practising members of the professions is beginning to be felt . 

  The UKCC and National Boards have a very important function in regulating standards of conduct by practitioners . 

  Those alleged to be guilty of misconduct such as to question their continued right to practise may become the subject of consideration by the Investigation Committee of a National Board and , where necessary , be referred for a hearing before the UKCC's Professional Conduct Committee ( PCC ) to answer the charge of being unfit to practise . 

  The PCC has the power to remove practitioners found guilty of misconduct from the Register , and to restore them within the terms of the empowering Act . 

  Those who are alleged to be unfit to practise by virtue of illness can be referred by the Investigating Committee , Professional Conduct Committee or any concerned citizen to a separate UKCC Health Committee , so that their cases may be considered with medical reports and advice available . 

  Any citizen ( whether within the profession or not ) , may allege misconduct or unfitness due to illness . 

  Those who are removed from the Register by the Professional Conduct Committee or Health Committee and are aggrieved by that decision may appeal to the appropriate Appeal Court for the part of the UK in which they reside . 

  Project 2000 -- a new preparation for practice 

  The UKCC's radical review of education and training , entitled Project 2000 -- a new preparation for practice , usually known as Project 2000 , was presented to Council in the Spring of 1986 , and a period of consultation with the professions followed . 

  A detailed analysis of the 2000 responses to the document was later published , as well as a financial consultancy analysis of manpower , finance and implementation issues . 

  In the main , the UKCC's proposals had two principal elements : a package of education and training reforms , and a package aimed at improving manpower supply and retention . 

  Members of the original project team took as their starting point the anticipated health care needs of the society in the 1990s . 

  Heralding Project 2000 as a landmark in nursing history , UKCC chair , Audrey Emerton , described the proposed reforms as designed to produce more appropriately prepared nurses equipped to meet the perceived health care needs of future generations . 

  Despite the inevitable uncertainties and anxieties which such major change might represent , she stressed the need for investment in education and training , and for more effective manpower planning and deployment if health care in the UK was to be put on a stronger and more confident foundation : 

  " Many nurses , midwives and health visitors would like even more radical changes , but the UKCC's ( present ) strategy will : 

  Provide the necessary levels and types of nursing care and which Government plans and Health Authorities " strategies demand . 

  Reflect the principal aspirations of the professions to provide better care . 

  In the medium term prove to be more cost-effective . 

  Maintain the pre-eminent position of British nursing in the world . 

  Address issues of finance and manpower realistically . " 

  The debate over Project 2000's cost and manpower implications has raged ever since the project group reported , but there is a strong consensus of feeling that the time for radical change is now at hand . 

  The recommendations of Project 2000 should be read in full in order to appreciate the rationale behind them . 

  Copies are obtainable by post or to personal callers , from UKCC offices at . 

  Space available here permits only a summary of the main points of Project 2000 . 

  Any re-entry or reorientation programme will usually include a discussion based on the UKCC's video presentation of its final proposals . 

  Courses of preparation for the new Project 2000 type education and training are in the planning stage . 

  The implications of these reforms for all nurses , midwives and health visitors are enormous . 

  A period of adjustment will be required as the role of support workers is properly identified and established . 

  Until the UKCC's final recommendations have definite government approval , accounts and impressions will remain the subject of speculation . 

  Summary of recommendations 

  1 

  A new division of labour characterised by a new single level of nurse who will embrace much of the work of the present two levels of nurse . 

  2 

  The introduction of a new specialist practitioner to undertake specialist roles in the hospital and community setting . 

  ( Such specialists will have a greater degree of experience , and have completed additional education and training ; their qualifications may be disease linked , i. e. diabetic liaison , stoma care , or may represent specialist knowledge in nursing intervention or in health promotion . 

  Some specialist practitioners will combine teaching with their practice and some will be team leaders . ) 

  3 

  A new list of competencies for the new nurse will be enshrined in statutory rules . 

  4 

  A new programme of preparation for the new nurse will normally be completed within three years , and will begin with a Common Foundation Programme ( CFP ) of at least 18 months in length , followed by a branch programme in mental health ; or nursing of persons with mental handicap ; or nursing of the adult ; or nursing of the child . 

  5 

  The UKCC proposes to maintain the present 18 month post-registration education and training for midwives and to maintain separate and distinct competencies for mid-wives . 

  It will continue to give support and encouragement to the extension and development of 3 year direct entry programmes . 

  6 

  The introduction of supernumerary status for nursing students . 

  In future students will be under the control of the Education rather than the Service side , and will only make a service contribution of 20 per cent of the student's time ( approximately 6 months of the 3 year period ) . 

  7 

  The introduction of non-means tested NHS controlled grants for nursing students , with provision for higher grants to be made available to mature entrants . 

  8 

  The cessation of the enrolled or second level nurse training as a move towards a new single grade of nurse . 

  9 

  Wherever possible nurse teachers will be required to be graduates . 

  The overall aim is to improve the education and training environment so that a teacher/ student ratio of 1:12 will be realised , and that " the facilities available for education and training should be no less than the best provided in higher education establishment " . 

  10 

  The introduction of a new range of nurse helpers/ support workers in the clinical setting to assist the qualified work-force in their duties . 

  Many first level nurses ( although still a minority ) now undertake basic nurse education as part of undergraduate study for a degree in nursing , social or life sciences . 

  Joint initiatives at all levels of pre- and postregistration courses are now being introduced , and more qualified staff are choosing to study for a qualification at diploma or degree level as part of their continuing professional education . 

  It is envisaged that the role of the clinical teacher as such will be subsumed into a wider role of teacher practitioner , who may have additional specialist knowledge and who is likely to be ward or unit based . 

  The position of the enrolled nurse 

  The single most contentious issue contained in Project 2000 is the cessation of preparation of new enrolled nurses . 

  The status of the second level nurse has troubled the profession for years , not least because they have been depended on as the mainstay of practical bedside nursing , while being expected to take on more responsibility than their training prepared them for . 

  As part of the move towards a single grade of nurse , enrolled nurses who wish and are able , are to be encouraged to convert to first level nurse status by way of a conversion course or some other approved means of study and assessment of competence . 

  The UKCC expressed its concern in a paper published in September 1988 , stating that it was " extremely concerned and aware of the difficulties experienced by large numbers of enrolled nurses in securing a place on existing conversion or bridging courses . 

  Of course , not every enrolled nurse will want to , or be academically capable of , converting to first level status . 

  The UKCC accepts this , and has indicated that all those who wish to remain as second level nurses should not be disadvantaged in the pursuit of their careers . 

  Recommendations on the additional preparation for conversion are included in the UKCC Paper PS &amp;amp; D/ 88/ 05 , The Enrolled Nurse and Preparation for Re-entry to a First Level part of the UKCC's Register . 

  Your local director of nurse education will hold a copy , and your local nursing library should have one on file . 

  Alternatively , copies may be available by writing direct to the director for professional standards and development at the UKCC . 

  In principle , courses may be specially designed for ENs on a full or part-time basis , or " comprise an individually designed range of approved learning activities , which might include day release , distance learning components , contract learning and planned modules from existing first level nurse courses " . 

  Conversion courses must address the kind , standard and content of courses required by the UKCC prior to application for registration as a first level nurse . 

  These are discussed in chapter 7 . 

  When applying for entry to a conversion course , past experience and qualifications will be taken into account , of course , but the demand for places on the 52-week courses is such that returning nurses are likely to be disadvantaged from those already practising . 

  The UKCC insists that any second level nurse seeking entry to a first level part of the register must successfully complete an examination of the same standard as that required for students undertaking a three year first level nursing preparation . 

  All conversion courses must be approved by the National Board of the country of practice . 

  Recognising the sheer impossibility of providing an adequate number of conversion courses of the 52 week full-time mode , the UKCC has outlined a more flexible approach to the problem by allowing for appropriate course content arrived at in ways outlined by PS &amp;amp; D/ 88/ 05 . 

  Whether the commitment from present enrolled nurses exists to make such approaches feasible , and whether there is sufficient financial help available to put them into practice , remains to be seen . 

  If , as a returner , you prefer to remain as a second level nurse , there should be no problem in obtaining a place on a re-entry programme . 

  Some fears have been expressed over the possibility of employers discriminating against ENs in favour of first level nurses . 

  Conversely , it is thought that some employers will leap at the chance of employing enrolled nurses knowing or believing them to be a cheaper alternative in terms of pay . 

  The clinical grading structure is such that enrolled nurses should never now be considered as a cheaper alternative . 

  The grading applies to responsibilities inherent in the post , so a job requiring the management skills of a first level nurse will not be open to those with a second level qualification . 

  The structure and grading is now very sensitive and complex , and any advice I give here has to be responsible and realistic . 

  I do not want to mislead you , or to deter you from making the right personal decision . 

  The appointment of ENs over first level nurses is a matter for local interpretation by nurse managers , for which there are really no obvious hard and fast rules . 

  Make clear to your prospective employer any plans you have for the future , and make sure that the post you accept is appropriate to these . 

  If you are a member of a union you can seek the advice of a steward . 

  RCN members are also advised to write to the college's assistant adviser ( enrolled nursing ) , , for advice and an information pack on issues of interest to enrolled nurses . 

  Nursing in context -- who sets the standards ? 

  At present the most accessible personal means we have of assessing the standard of care we give to patients is the UKCC's Code of Professional Conduct . 

  The current legislation states that : " The powers of Council shall include that of giving , in such manner as it thinks fit , advice to nurses , midwives and health visitors on standards of professional conduct . " 

  In November 1984 the UKCC addressed the professions directly when it published and circulated the second edition of the Code . 

  Reg Pyne , director for professional conduct at the UKCC , has suggested six definitions of the Code : 

  1 

  That for registered nurses , midwives and health visitors the Code is an extended definition of professional accountability . 

  2 

  That it is one means by which the UKCC seeks to satisfy the requirements of the law . 

  3 

  That the Code is a portrait of the kind of practitioner the Council wishes to see within the professions . 

  4 

  That the Code is a backcloth against which allegations of misconduct and unfitness to practise are judged . 

  5 

  That it is a weapon with which practitioners can fight for improvements in standards , and the elimination of risks in the interests of their patients . 

  6 

  That the Code is a statement to the profession of the primacy of the patients' interests . 

  The Code appears in Appendix 1 . 

  It is worth re-reading it before continuing with this chapter . 

  When you begin to read about contemporary nursing practice you will soon become familiar with the issues surrounding the " exercise of professional accountability " . 

  But what exactly is it , and what relevance has it in every day terms ? 

  Burnard and Chapman warn that the words " accountability " and " responsibility " , although often used synonymously , are actually quite different : 

  While people may be held to be responsible for an action they may not always be asked to account for it . 

  The nurse , however , is not only responsible for the care given , but should be able to explain why it is given in the way it is . 

  It is necessary for the nurse not only to be concerned with the outcome of the action but she must understand its origins and the process of carrying it out . 

  Learners , for instance , may not be held accountable , because accountability implies knowledge , and it is unlikely that the learner will have acquired sufficient knowledge or have sufficient practical experience on which to base the assessment of the care given . 

  The student may therefore be held responsible , but not accountable , for her actions , until she becomes sufficiently knowledgeable and experienced , and hence qualified . 

  Burnard and Chapman go further-than this definition , by recommending that knowledge should be research based and up to date if it is to be the best for accountability in practice . 

  In their book Professional and Ethical Issues in Nursing they carefully consider each clause of the Code of Conduct , and expand on its scope and implications . 

  The authors see the requirement for the nurse to re-register every three years ( periodic licensing ) , as an important step forward in ensuring " that all patients receive the highest level of care and that the qualified nurse can really be seen to be in a position of accountability " . 

  If we define accountability as " being answerable " to someone for our actions , then to whom are we answerable ? 

  Even 10 years ago any nurse who was asked this question would probably have replied " I am answerable to sister . " 

  Today the reality is just as straightforward , but may not be what a returning nurse might expect . 

  The UKCC's global accountability is to the public on behalf of the professions . 

  The nurse's individual accountability is to her patients first , but additionally to her managers , her employers and to her profession . 

  Thus , where a conflict of interest exists between satisfying the wishes of the manager/ employer and protecting the interests of the patient , your duty of care is to your patients first . 

  This has raised far reaching and important issues of conscience since the Code was first published . 

  Nurses are now encouraged to exercise their professional judgement in safe-guarding the interests of individual patients and clients , and for some this means exposing poor management and refusing to carry out instructions which they believe to be against the interests of their patients/ clients . 

  It can take a great deal of courage and confidence to challenge colleagues in this way , but as you will see by studying the Code itself , the definition and standards of conduct required are clear and unequivocal , even if putting them into practice is not always as easy as it is made to sound . 

  Those of you who trained under a very autocratic system , dominated by a strictly imposed hierarchy where nurses came somewhere close to the bottom of the pyramid , are likely to find the concept of accountability quite daunting . 

  Whatever your length of time away from the bedside , however , the Code of Conduct enables us to make sense of accountability , and to assess its relevance to the settings in which we work . 

  As Reg Pyne advises : " In summary the portrait ( Code ) is of a practitioner who has the capacity to challenge , the honesty to ask why , the empathy to care , the skill to perform competently , and the determination not to be put down " . 

  Copies of the Code , plus guidance on confidentiality , and on advertising by registered nurses , midwives and health visitors , are available as advisory pamphlets from the UKCC . 

  Tutors and mentors will wish to examine and introduce professional and ethical issues relating to the Code as and when opportunities present themselves . 

  The references and further reading I have included here would make useful introductory reading to this subject and may help to prepare you for sessions and discussions based on the concept of accountability . 

  The nature of stress in nursing 

  A graphic account of the cumulative effects of too much stress experienced by nurses is given by Martin Bamber : 

  A nurse under stress can not listen empathetically nor respond sensitively . 

  Stress in the nurse can erode the nurse-patient relationship , or even act as a barrier to forming one . 

  The quality of care provided by the nurse can be influenced by the levels of stress among the work force . 

  While most of us would acknowledge that some level of stress is required to enable us to function and to be sufficiently motivated , the effects of continued high levels of stress have been shown to have a damaging effect on the ability to maintain our personal sense of purpose , usefulness and well-being . 

  Bamber blames glamorised media portrayals of nurses for contributing to the problem in that they " do nothing to support realistic expectations of working in a hospital , but only seem to strengthen the " angel " stereotype " . 

  As Bamber explains , such high expectations of the work , and an unrealistic idealism surrounding " caring " and the medical model of illness , " come crashing down with the reality of work experience " . 

  Stress is a subject which has received a lot of attention and study in recent years . 

  If we consider sources of stress as " stressors " which build up to form a number of pressures , then it becomes possible to identify where stress is coming from and what it can ultimately lead us to . 

  We can then begin to look for stress reducing and coping strategies to help alleviate the difficulties experienced in the everyday work situation . 

  Potential stressors 

  Looking at stress generally , and not necessarily as it affects nurses , the following might be considered as potential trouble spots : 

  Transition and change , particularly major personal life changes and catastrophes , such as bereavement , separation , divorce , financial hardship , illness , the birth of a child ( to include miscarriage and stillbirth ) conflict in relationships at home or work , having " something to hide " , working to deadlines , taking up a new job , moving house , taking examinations . 

  Threats to our sense of dignity and self-worth , and to our authority or control over a situation . 

  Burdens of responsibility , worry over those close to us , our children , elderly parents , the health or welfare of a spouse . 

  Performance stress -- do we meet other's requirements as a husband/ wife/ mother/ daughter/ son/ employee ? 

  Who assesses our performance , and how much store do we set by their judgement ? 

  Thinking more specifically about nurses we could include : 

  Conflicts of interest in trying to serve two masters ( the patient and " the system " ) and shortcomings in preparation and instruction for a new role . 

  Conflict between " managing " and being managed . 

  Pressure to " cope " , and not be seen to let the side down . 

  Pressure to live up to our own and other's expectations . 

  The need to deal with tragic , emotionally traumatic and depressing situations , and to help others to acknowledge and come to terms with loss . 

  Increased workloads , lack of recognition for the standard of work achieved , lack of feedback and appreciation , being taken for granted . 

  The inadequacy of nurse training in the past to equip nurses for these pressures and the consequences of pressurised decision-making is a very good reason in itself for reforming nurse education . 

  As Jane Salvage points out , nurse training to date has done very little to make nurses into strong and independent people : 

  Everyone in nursing has at some time experienced the abuse of power by someone more senior , and has been hurt by it , yet the system is difficult to modify . 

  Strength and independence are useful prerequisites in de-fending ourselves against the effects of stress , but they need the support of a communal sense of responsibility , of sharing a load , and of sharing it fairly in order to make the load feel lighter . 

  Clauses 1 , 4 , 10 and 11 of the UKCC Code of Professional Conduct refer to the individual practitioner's accountability in this area . 

  The latter two are particularly relevant to the idea of identifying and dealing with major stressors . 

  Clause 10 reads : 

  Have regard to the environment of care and its physical , psychological and social effects on patients/ clients , and also to the adequacy of resources , and make known to appropriate persons or authorities any circumstances which could place patients/ clients in jeopardy or which militate against safe standards of practice . 

  I can remember , as a first year nursing student , protesting at the treatment of an elderly woman of poor sight and hearing who , while recovering from hip surgery , often felt sick and occasionally vomited . 

  A barium meal was ordered and the woman was thrown on to a trolley and forced to endure indignities ( being shouted at , roughly handled , and left in a draughty corridor with only me to help her ) at the hands of a very senior consultant radiologist . 

  While the investigation was being carried out she was pushed up on the X-ray table with sufficient force to rip the intravenous infusion from an already bruised and swollen arm . 

  Barium was forced down her with only minimal explanation , and when I protested the radiologist swore and told me to " mind my place " while the assisting radiographer quickly looked away . 

  When the woman was upset and thoroughly bewildered we were sent away and told to report back later that afternoon . 

  On returning to the ward somewhat shaken myself I made the patient as comfortable as I could and asked to speak to the ward sister , who was fortunately very experienced and prepared to believe what I told her . 

  I was summoned to the matron ( the then equivalent of director of nursing services ) who thanked me for telling her , but asked whether I was aware that the consultant was the most senior in the faculty , and probably one of the world's most eminent ? 

  I really could not expect to pursue the matter if I wished to continue my training . 

  Strangely , it was decided that a repeat investigation was not required and I was allowed to go on caring for the patient throughout her stay . 

  How it would have helped to have had Clause 10 to guide me , and the means by which to make my protest public . 

  Even ten years ago the notion of the nurse as the patient's advocate had not been formally recognised , and the stress involved in being unable to act properly in the patient's defence was almost enough to persuade me to give up altogether . 

  It was left to a clinical teacher to absorb this stress , and to persuade me that there was nothing to gain from " abandoning the cause " . 

  Although the Code is the tool of the qualified practitioner it is still the model for all current nursing students in preparing for their roles as nurses and advocates of the patient . 

  Clause 11 acknowledges the effects of unacceptable pressures on the nursing team : 

  Have regard to the workload and the pressures on professional colleagues and subordinates and take appropriate action if these are seen to be such as to constitute abuse of the individual practitioner and/ or to jeopardise safe standards of practice . 

  Stress signals can manifest themselves in different ways according to the individual's predisposition and personality . 

  An increased awareness of potential stressors brought about by better education and an understanding of individual and group responses to it can help to prevent stress from becoming unmanageable and overwhelming . 

  Stress reducing strategies 

  The special stressors applicable to returning nurses and health visitors could include : 

  Initial nervousness and insecurity when faced with unfamiliar surroundings and situations . 

  Not wishing to appear stupid or ill-informed in front of patients and colleagues . 

  Lack of up to date knowledge leading to a potential crisis of confidence . 

  Apprehension at potential mistakes . 

  Meeting new people . 

  High and unrealistic expectations of the re-entry programme or proposed job . 

  Concern over the changes in lifestyle to undertake the job . 

  Awareness that others often younger and less experienced will be in a position of authority at work . 

  Recognition from educators and managers that such stress exists and is legitimate is a very important initial strategy in coming to terms with both the positive and the negative influences of stress . 

  Tackling an inherent lack of confidence in the stressed individual is also crucial ( as discussed in chapter 2 ) , as is increasing the individual's awareness that they are not alone , and that networks can be developed to reduce its impact . 

  The use of assertiveness and relaxation skills heighten the sense of self-worth , as do peer support groups and reliable and empathetic mentor systems . 

  Nash describes the use of " stress skills " in combating the stress that works against us , and in putting the same stress to work for us instead . 

  She describes " discernment " -- " the ability to recognise and acknowledge particular strands in a situation " -- as underlying all stress skills : 

  Many situations of stress feel like a tangled knot of coloured threads -- the more you pull at it the worse it gets . 

  But if the different strands can be gradually disentangled , the situation becomes easier . 

  It depends as much on the recognition and discernment of each strand as the ability to follow it through . 

  Her strategies include acknowledging you own sense of wholeness , of taking care to listen properly , to take charge of whatever choice you make ; to rechannel blame and guilt into something more positive , and to make space and time for what is really important , for instance not finding yourself bogged down in trivia when there are more important issues to be confronted . 

  Nash's approach of wholeness is primarily a Christian outlook on stress which provides an interesting contrast to Meg Bond's major work on stress in nursing entitled Stress and Self Awareness . 

  I would strongly recommend both books in providing enlightening routes out of a very demanding and difficult area . 

  The transition from returner to returned can be helped by the understanding of colleagues and tutors , but inevitably your success in meeting any new demands made upon you will depend on your own reserves of willpower , assertiveness , give and take , and common sense . 

  Effective coping strategies have to confront stressors directly ; hoping that they will go away or get better is not usually enough . 

  You will gradually learn to decode the complex mess-ages which differentiate between acceptable , manageable , positive stressors which can be successfully modified , and those which require additional outside help to be contained . 

  Take some time to read around the subject of stress , and to experiment with new ways of coping . 

  The further reading I recommend can help you to challenge some commonly held assumptions about where stress comes from , and should help you to structure your own plan for coping with it in a way which is appropriate to you personally . 

  References 

  Recommended reading 

  Returning to Learning 

  " Where there is much desire to learn there of necessity will be much arguing , much writing , many opinions : for opinion in good men is but knowledge in the making " John Milton , 1608-1674 

  If you can forgive Milton for what might now be considered to be a sexist remark , there is a 17th century solidity about his philosophy of learning . 

  Strangely , it has taken the nursing education establishment in Britain until now to recognise the value of debate , and the need to educate nurses for their own sake , as well as in the interests of patient care . 

  The very evolution from the concept of nurse " training " to nurse " education " is a relatively recent development which has really only gained momentum in the past eight to ten years . 

  The word " training " implies a moulding , a conformity to a stereotype , and is applied more usually to technical apprenticeships where rote learning of facts , routines and technical data is essential to enable a trade to be carried out efficiently . 

  But where does this leave nursing ? 

  Is nursing purely a matter of imitating and repeating rote tasks , and therefore unworthy of anything more than the sympathetic application of a set of predetermined rules ? 

  The exercise of accountability , and of professional judgement , by their very definitions require much more in-depth knowledge , and the ability to analyse and evaluate information , and to relate both to the care of individuals and to client groups . 

  The ability to identify and assess problems , and to understand their effects and limitations on patients can not be learned passively and by rote , if only because no two people respond to the same problem in exactly the same way . 

  If you have been away from nurse education for some time you will be very pleasantly surprised by the much more interactive and civilised approach to learning apparent in most schools and colleges of nursing . 

  The example of our colleagues in the higher education sector has had a major , positive influence on the educational methods employed by nurse educators , even if the initial response to this has at times been guarded by the " old school " establishment . 

  The move is much more towards learning by and from personal experience , not just in nursing , but from everyday life , from contact with others and from previous employment , anything which adds an extra dimension to the way we perceive problems and set about dealing with them . 

  The didactic approach of preaching to " learners " ( rather than " students " ) and of spoonfeeding them with preset values and objectives is gradually being replaced by a much more human approach where students are enabled to question and study , and to add to knowledge themselves as they extract the best from individual learning experiences . 

  The move towards student and supernumerary status for all those undertaking a nursing education -- not just undergraduates -- and the plans to replace training allowances with a non means tested grant , means that the position and role of the student is expected to shift dramatically from learning " by trial and error " to learning from practical experience and knowledge based on authoritative research . 

  Research skills are now taught very early in nurse education , so that the value of research is appreciated not as an ephemeral , ivory tower point of view , but as a solid foundation for basing nursing care on the most effective means currently available of providing care . 

  You might argue that the only way for a nurse to learn how to dress a wound or administer an injection is by observing and practising the skill until she is competent . 

  Research does not argue with this , but it does cut out a lot of hard work by providing evidence on the best methods , treatments , or products available from which you can begin to make choices and evaluate the effectiveness of care given as a result . 

  Returning nurses can feel threatened by the mention of " research based care " or " experiential learning " . 

  I believe that this may be due to the sense of security and feeling of being safe which comes from familiar methods and tasks . 

  The idea that the care you provide might be questioned or challenged is an entirely new experience for nurses " trained " by traditional methods . 

  It is refreshingly easy to overcome initial fears , however , if you are prepared to enter into the debate , and not allow yourself to take comments or criticisms personally when a student peers at you agog for carrying out what they see as an archaic approach . 

  More information on acquiring research skills is provided in the next chapter . 

  As an introduction to refreshing reading and study skills , Philip Burnard , lecturer in the School of Nursing Studies at the University of Wales College of Medicine , describes what is meant by experiential and student centred learning . 

  An example of a useful self assessment exercise is also provided . 

  Experiential learning 

  There is an increasing realisation that a need exists to bridge the " theory-practice " gap in nursing . 

  One way of achieving this is the means of using nurses' personal and life experience in the learning situation . 

  Increasingly , " experiential learning methods " are being used in nurse education , both in basic and postbasic programmes . 

  In order to appreciate what experiential learning is , it may be helpful to consider three types of knowledge ( Figure 6.1 ) . 

  Theoretical knowledge is " textbook " knowledge . 

  It is knowledge that derives from scholarship and from research . 

  Practical knowledge , on the other hand is knowledge about how to do things . 

  Whenever a nurse gives an injection or changes a dressing she demonstrates the application of practical knowledge . 

  Both of these types of knowledge have traditionally been included in nurse education programmes . 

  Experiential knowledge , however , is knowledge gained through direct experience with a person , place or thing . 

  It is personal or private knowledge that develops out of familiarity with a situation . 

  For example , before a person visits America , they may have theoretical knowledge about it . 

  When they visit the country , however , that knowledge is transformed -- the person's knowledge of the place becomes altogether different . 

  It becomes personal , rich and alive . 

  This , then , is the nature of experiential knowledge . 

  It derives from the process of living . 

  Figure 6.1 Three domains of knowledge 

  Nurses gain a valuable store of experiential knowledge through working with patients and colleagues in the wards and in the community . 

  They also develop it through the process of living , itself . 

  Experiential learning methods aim to develop that domain of knowledge by offering a range of experience through which the nurse can learn . 

  Examples of experiential learning methods include role play , structured group exercises and counselling skills exercises . 

  They differ from more traditional educational techniques which focussed more on theoretical and practical knowledge . 

  Experiential learning methods ask nurses to experience something for themselves . 

  Thus the learning that follows is personal and yet highly meaningful to the individual . 

  Experiential learning methods are particularly useful as a means of developing interpersonal and communication skills . 

  If , for instance , the nurse is to develop a range of counselling skills there seems little point in her learning it in a theoretical sense . 

  Nor can she merely learn a mechanical set of techniques . 

  What , perhaps , she needs to do is to learn to counsel by doing counselling and by being counselled . 

  The methods have other applications in nursing . 

  Many practical nursing procedures from bedmaking to changing a dressing may best be learned through the nurse experiencing what these procedures feel like from the patient's point of view . 

  Thus many nurse educators now set up simulations in the nurse education centre or the ward which allow direct experience of practical nursing skills . 

  Such direct experience helps the nurse to develop sensitivity and self-awareness . 

  To experience something , ourselves , is to make us more sensitive to the needs and wants of others . 

  As we have seen , experiential learning methods may be encountered on a wide range of nurse education courses , including Back to Nursing courses . 

  Table 6.1 offers examples of experiential learning activities used in nurse education . 

  Table 6.1 Examples of experiential learning activities used in nurse education 

  Student-centred learning 

  One of the aims of modem nursing is to encourage patient autonomy . 

  It is the patient who helps to decide on the course of his care and he may be asked to help to draw up objectives of care . 

  In keeping with this approach , educational methods in nurse education are increasingly moving towards a student-centred , negotiated approach to learning . 

  In the past nurse educators decided on what and how learners should learn in the process of nursing . 

  In recent years , however , has come the realisation that adults learn best when they have a say in what and how they learn . 

  After all , not everyone learns in the same way . 

  Some learn best from books , others from lectures and yet others from free and open discussion . 

  Out of this diversity has emerged the notion of student-centred learning . 

  In the student-centred approach , it is the student ( or learner ) who decides what and how she learns . 

  Thus a course tutor may invite workshop members to identify their own learning needs , to write learning objectives and consider ways in which they would like to learn the new skills or information they need . 

  Such an approach takes into account different people's knowledge and skills levels , their varying educational , cultural and life experience . 

  In the student-centred approach all this variety is used and incorporated into the learning process . 

  Thus learning is no longer a passive activity involving the tutor " filling " the learners with new ideas and facts . 

  Instead , learning becomes an active , dynamic process that respects individual differences , needs and wants . 

  Many schools of nursing , colleges and university departments now use the student-centred approach in teaching nursing knowledge and skills . 

  The approach is also frequently encountered on refresher courses . 

  Table 6.2 illustrates how the approach may be applied in a back to nursing workshop . 

  Both the concepts of experiential learning and student-centred learning reflect the changing appreciation of the needs of the individual to develop and grow . 

  We do not all live the same lives nor do we all need the same things . 

  Experiential learning and student-centred learning can enable us to develop an increased awareness of helping people to make choices for themselves . 

  If we can choose the means by which we learn nursing , we are more likely to allow others to choose the way they are cared for . 

  Stage 1 Negotiation with workshop members of learning objectives for the workshop 

  Stage two Identification of learning resources within the group ( including both workshop participants and facilitator ) 

  Stage three Planning of structure and content of workshop based on previous two stages 

  Stage four Learning activities in line with plan 

  Stage five Evaluation of learning with reference to stage one 

  Table 6.2 Stages in the process of applying the student-centred approach in a back to nursing workshop 

  Both experiential learning and student-centred learning approaches are particularly suited to the adult learner . 

  Adults bring a wealth of life experience to the learning situation and such experience can be a vital component in the educational encounter . 

  Indeed , such life experience is , of course , a form of experiential knowledge , itself ! 

  All such knowledge must be of value in nursing , where a wide range of people from a broad range of cultures are cared for daily in a variety of contexts both at home and in the hospital setting . 

  Self-assessment 

  In order to plan further educational or skills programmes it is necessary , periodically , to stop and review progress . 

  Self-assessment methods are useful , here , in that they can be carried out by the individual without the need of a tutor or teacher . 

  One simple self-assessment method is to draw up two columns : one lists recent achievements , the other further needs ( Table 6.3 ) . 

  These two lists may then be used to identify further training needs and goals . 

  The goals may be used as a personal memory-aid or discussed with a peer , tutor or nurse manager . 

  The point of such an exercise is to clearly focus on present learning needs and to clarify the process of learning . 

  Table 6.3 Simple self-assessment form 

  Another method of self-assessment involves a friend or colleague . 

  Here , the two people meet and each takes ten minutes to reflect on and verbalise the achievements that they have made and identify further needs . 

  During this ten minutes , the other colleague merely listens to the other person's assessment . 

  After the ten minute period , both people switch roles and the " listener " becomes the one who reflects and verbalises . 

  Again , this method can be used to identify future learning goals . 

  Its advantage is that it allows a far deeper and richer assessment to be made than the pen and paper exercise . 

  It also serves as a useful means of relieving stress through review of recent weeks . 

  Once established , the 20 minute process can be repeated at frequent intervals . 

  Self assessment may also take place in a group context . 

  A small group of about five or six colleagues meet and each , in turn , reviews the past week in terms of achievements and future needs . 

  Once each has had a turn , the group may spend a few minutes discussing possible methods of achieving any identified learning needs . 

  Again , such a group , meeting on a regular basis , may serve as a stress-reducing medium . 

  A problem shared , after all , is said to be a problem halved . 

  All these methods have been used in nurse education in recent years and reflect the student-centred approaches being adopted by many nurse educators . 

  Continuing your professional education 

  In its strategy for continuing education provision for qualified nurses in Scotland , the Scottish National Board for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting accepts in principle the recommendations of a working party on continuing education and professional development for the three professions which reported in 1981 . 

  It is valuable to reiterate these recommendations as they very clearly convey the rationale behind current trends : 

  There is a longstanding belief , in many walks of life , that basic preparation should suffice for a lifetime of practice . 

  This belief is being challenged . 

  Members of the nursing profession , who once assumed that training for registration would equip them for a career in nursing now realise that this is no longer the case . 

  As with other professionals , they must learn and relearn throughout their professional lives if they are to keep pace with modern trends and changing needs . 

  This awareness is relatively new , but if a nursing service of high quality is a goal to be achieved , nurses must have an understanding of human behaviour and the knowledge and skills to implement new technologies . 

  Formal nursing courses reflect these concerns , but there is at present no mechanism for updating the knowledge of those who qualified some time ago . 

  Experience does not necessarily fill this gap as people learn very differently from experience . 

  In future , initial teaching must reflect the opinion that education in nursing , as in all professions , must continue after first qualification and opportunities are needed to make this a reality . 

  Scotland is ahead of the rest of the UK in providing an accessible modular system of continuing education whereby qualified nurses can undertake planned learning experiences in the form of " modules " designed to meet the needs of different clinical specialties , and in more generic form , drawing from major areas of study drawn from moral , legal and political issues related to nursing , nursing practice , technology and science related to nursing . 

  Newly qualified nurses are expected to receive an orientation and induction programme appropriate to their appointments , followed by a consolidation period for a minimum period of three months , when it is recommended that a few hours each week be set aside for learning periods either with other newly qualified staff or as self-directed learning . 

  Following assessment and successful completion of a period of consolidation the nurse is then encouraged to proceed into a two part professional studies programme which leads to the National Board for Scotland Diploma in Professional Studies . 

  Providing the resources and the opportunities to follow this example is a major consideration for the statutory and professional bodies throughout the UK . 

  In an ideal world every qualified nurse would have the chance to further her professional education in this way . 

  The reality is of course very different , and although more initiatives are being introduced , much at present depends on the individual nurse's attitude towards continuing her education , and on her initiating the process for herself . 

  The boom in study days and conferences and in nursing literature is evidence of consumer demand for enjoyable ways of adding to professional knowledge , and there is now no need whatever to view continuing education as a chore and a duty to be carried out in isolation from colleagues and friends . 

  Many nursing studies departments have tutors with a specific remit for assisting nurses with their postbasic education , and they are usually very happy to provide assistance and advice to nurses currently in practice . 

  Examples of the many post-registration opportunities avail-able are given in Jill Baker's book What Next ? 

  Post-basic Opportunities for Nurses and in a book prepared by the Department of Health and the Central Office of Information entitled Which way -- continuing education for first level registered nurses , available from the careers centres addresses given in appendix 3 . 

  Refreshing reading and study skills 

  The first thing you may find yourself doing in advance of this is blowing the dust from old textbooks in a fleeting fit of nostalgia . 

  However thick the dust on your bookshelves may be you will either be reassured that you still remember a great deal of what you originally learnt from your training and former jobs , or you will be seized by momentary panic at how much you have forgotten . 

  The late 1980s have witnessed a virtual revolution in the range and quality of learning materials produced for nurses of every clinical specialism and professional interest . 

  It is less usual to talk about nursing " textbooks " as such . 

  Reading is encouraged across the whole spectrum of nursing literature rather , reflecting in part the principles of holism ; of caring for the whole person rather than being disease or disorder linked . 

  The materials you will be expected to use and enjoy will include a wide range of nursing journals , some of them well established and some which are entirely new to the market . 

  The move to place nurse education within the realms of higher education has encouraged publishers to be more outward looking , and to provide more specialist in-depth titles , rather than vast tomes which promise to deliver comprehensive knowledge and yet which fail to do so by being too general . 

  The books being published now are more attractive and relevant ; they are usually written by experienced and practising nurses rather than doctors , and as a result are more appealing to the reader and are reviewed more enthusiastically than has been the case in the past . 

  Distance and open learning materials can be used effectively at home , obviating the need to have a tutor constantly at your elbow . 

  You will have more freedom to explore what interests you rather than being directed in your study by adherence to arbitrary book lists which encourage regurgitation of facts and diagrams without any analysis of the content . 

  Audio-visual materials , cassettes and videotapes , and access to computer based learning will simplify a lot of what used to be dull and repetitive work . 

  By responding to your own learning needs rather than being expected to absorb blanket information as a group , you will be able to chart your own progress more accurately , develop and extend your interests and expertise , and research new materials as and when you feel the need . 

  Reading 

  You will probably appreciate some guidance and direction early on in your reading , and for this reason chapter 7 provides bibliographies which are intended to give you a flavour of current methods and ideas . 

  The skills required for proficient reading take time to acquire . 

  I have been an avid reader since nursery school , and so find it very difficult to understand my headmaster husband when he dawdles over anything except travel brochures and restaurant menus ! 

  It does seem that some people would consider themselves natural and enthusiastic readers , while others need persuasion and encouragement to do anything other than " dip " into a book . 

  You can begin by identifying different reading skills : skim or rapid reading , concentrated reading , information gathering , and reading which is done purely for pleasure and entertainment . 

  Skim-reading is fine if you are hoping only to get the " gist " rather than the finer points of a piece , but dangerous if you are hoping to absorb information , or need to consider all sides of an argument . 

  Silent , concentrated reading , however , needs time , space and peace and quiet , away from the demands of work , the family , your social life and television . 

  It needs to be planned ahead rather than squeezed . 

  in around other commitments , particularly if you are preparing written work or you have to present a seminar . 

  It can be helpful to limit your reading time , allowing time for taking notes , or responding to queries . 

  When you know you only have half an hour or so you can become quite absorbed and interested , and quite jealous of the limit you have set yourself . 

  You can then congratulate yourself for going over your time , or at least by persevering satisfy yourself that you have made a little headway . 

  Library skills 

  It is a good idea to spend some time initially on familiarising yourself with your nursing library , and any specialist collections which may be of use to you . 

  Librarians usually produce a guide to using their libraries . 

  You can also make an appointment with the librarian or one of his staff so that the classification system can be explained to you together with any skills involved in scanning the microfiche for details of authors , articles and sources . 

  Returners often express difficulties in knowing where to begin , on which books to buy and which to borrow . , Some course tutors supply their own introductory reading lists , and most specify " musts " such as the UKCC Code of Professional Conduct ; but others will arrange an early library session so that you are free to browse and survey what is available locally . 

  This is unlikely to give you enough time to appreciate the breadth of materials on offer , however , and you could certainly supplement this by obtaining catalogues from nursing and medical book suppliers and by reading the book reviews in the nursing journals . 

  Both the RCN and HVA collections are impressive , and current bibliographies are available by subscription on application to the librarians . 

  These are as comprehensive an update as you are likely to get in the UK . 

  Both libraries operate a system of postal loans , provided postal charges are met by the borrower . 

  Details are available on request from the librarian . 

  Writing skills 

  These are best acquired by regular practice , by reading , and by disciplining yourself to avoid unnecessary jargon , ambiguity and frills . 

  There are several tips on note-taking and writing skills in an excellent book prepared by the Open University for prospective students called Preparing to Study , and I strongly recommend it to anyone who lacks confidence in this area . 

  It is available from book suppliers , and costs 2.95 plus 95p postage . 

  Preparing to Study also looks at learning via discussion and improving reading skills . 

  It gives help on presenting your thoughts on paper and on getting the best out of libraries and the media to expand your knowledge and boost your confidence . 

  Writing and reporting skills are now much more sophisticated than even five years ago , and much more is expected of nurses and health visitors in completing documentation , preparing care plans and relating progress and evaluation reports , and in providing background reports for the information and assistance of other health professionals . 

  Time spent studying how others write can be helpful , although old habits can take some time to die , and some nurses who have difficulty in grasping new concepts can persist in applying old rules to new procedures , so do be warned . 

  Recommended reading on this subject is offered at the end of this chapter , but any opportunity you have to practise writing skills , in a workshop or as part of a coursework exercise , is time well invested . 

  Memory and retention skills can also be tested on each other , and you can be surprised by the misunderstandings which can result from not listening properly , or from being given inadequate or misleading information . 

  The skills involved in communicating information well are , I think , often underestimated , and could usefully be the subject for extensive practical workshops as part of a responsible continuing education programme . 

  Organising yourself 

  Of all study skills , perhaps the most elusive is the ability to organise and manage time effectively . 

  This may be a matter for personal negotiation between yourself , your flatmates , friends , family and so on , and you may have to forego other pursuits for a while in order to establish a good study habit . 

  If you are conscientious at organising your notes and materials so that they can be referred to easily , then you will quickly be able to build up a personal library and reference system . 

  If , like me , you tend to sit on mountains of paper , and rely on your memory to root out a reference , then you will need to be strong and discipline yourself to filing items away as soon as you have finished with them , either in folders or binders or in cabinet or box file , depending on the amount of space you have available . 

  If , also like me , you have a weakness for stockpiling past copies of nursing journals because you intend to catch up on such and such an article , then it is worth investing in some proper journal binders . 

  These are relatively inexpensive and can help to restore order to superficial chaos . 

  They are usually obtainable from publishers and can be purchased singly or in batches , depending on your personal requirements . 

  References 

  Recommended reading 

  Changes in Nursing Practice 

  Competencies and the nursing practitioner 

  By the time a nurse qualifies and becomes eligible for registration on the UKCC's Professional Register , she will have satisfied the competencies ( relevant to her specialism ) for the registered nurse as set down in Rule 18 of the Nurses , Midwives and Health Visitors Rules Approval Order 1983 S-I-1983 No 873 . 

  As a returner , these are the skills in which you will be expected to be competent before being allowed to return to practice . 

  There is , as yet , no system in operation which allows your competence to be assessed to a national standard , and it will be left to the discretion of your service manager , and course tutors if you have undertaken a back to nursing course , to decide whether you are ready to return , or what additional guidance or preparation you may need to bring you up to the required standard . 

  Re-entry programmes may include practical clinical assessments , but it is more usual to rely on reports from any supervised clinical allocations undertaken during a course , and any personal assessments carried out by continuing education tutors , your mentor , or senior nurse assessors working in the area where you will be working . 

  Competencies for first level nurses ( parts 1 , 3 , 5 , 8 of the Register ) 

  First level nurses are expected to " acquire the competencies required to " : 

  Advise on the promotion of health and the prevention of illness . 

  Recognise situations that may be detrimental to the health and well-being of the individual . 

  Carry out those activities involved when conducting the comprehensive assessment of a person's nursing requirements . 

  Recognise the significance of observations made of a patient and use these to develop an initial nursing assessment . 

  Devise a plan of nursing based on the assessment , with the co-operation of the patient , to the extent that this is possible , taking into account the medical prescription . 

  Implement the planned programme of nursing care , and where appropriate , teach and coordinate other members of the caring team who may be responsible for implementing specific aspects of the nursing care . 

  Review the effectiveness of the nursing care provided and where appropriate , initiate any action which may be required . 

  Work in a team with other nurses and with medical and paramedical staff and social workers . 

  Undertake the management of the care of a group of patients over a period of time and organise the appropriate support service . 

  All these competencies are related to the care of the particular type of patient with whom she is likely to come in contact when registered in that part of the Register for which the student intends to qualify . 

  Competencies for second level nurses ( parts 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 of the Register ) 

  Second level nurses are expected to " acquire the competencies required to " : 

  Assist in carrying out comprehensive observation of the patient and help in assessing his care requirements . 

  Develop skills to enable her ( the nurse ) , to assist in the implementation of nursing care under the direction of a first level nurse . 

  Accept delegated nursing tasks . 

  Work in a team with other nurses , and with medical and para-medical staff and social workers . 

  These competencies are related to the care of the particular type of patient with whom the nurse is likely to come in contact when registered in that part of the Register for which the student intends to qualify . 

  These competencies will be revised in proposed amendments to the current legislation in line with UKCC policy and the setting up of educational reforms introduced by Project 2000 ( see chapter 5 ) . 

  The most obvious change in nursing practice apparent to returners is the active involvement of patients and clients in their own care . 

  The preparation of the " new " nurse proposed by Project 2000 will reflect and build on this trend of helping people to initiate and promote healthy lifestyles . 

  While health visitors are presently considered to be the experts in health promotion , in future nurses of every clinical specialty will be expected to play an important role in health promotion , and in educating patients and colleagues towards self help in addition to getting the very best out of available health resources and expertise . 

  This promises to make nursing as a career much more dynamic and pro-active , although the nursing role in caring for the sick and those people limited by disability will continue and develop in response to the needs expressed by society . 

  Emphasis on caring for people in their own homes and in the communities in which they live means that more and more initiatives and nursing teams will become community based . 

  Care provided in hospitals will therefore be more acute , with patients being discharged earlier to the care of primary health teams of general practitioners , district and specialist community nurses , practice nurses and health visitors . 

  Managing change 

  In order to help you obtain a broad background to recent philosophical and clinical developments in nursing , I have resisted the urge to present you with my own very limited definitions of changes which have occurred , and instead I have prepared exercises and suggested reading based on the criteria outlined by the UKCC on desired outcomes for successful completion of a re-entry programme . 

  It is not possible to cover all the professional and clinical issues in a book of this size , and in any case this would require the expertise of specialists in the field . 

  Instead I have included those topics which were raised most consistently by returners as a potential source of worry or concern , culled from my own background research for learning materials aimed at returning nurses and health visitors . 

  Broadly speaking , these are : 

  The impact of new technologies in nursing . 

  Changes in nursing management and in the nursing hierarchy . 

  Practical handling skills , and developments in equipment to assist mobility and promote independence . 

  Skills required for safe drug administration and management . 

  Issues regarding infection control , and in particular the transmission of HIV and hepatitis . 

  Pain assessment and control , and the care of the terminally ill person and his family . 

  Planning individualised nursing care based on nursing models and the nursing process . 

  Emergency procedures for cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( especially the nurse's role ) . 

  The extended role of the nurse and its implications for returners . 

  Clinical policies and procedures . 

  Wound care and management . 

  Research skills . 

  The experience of stress and stress management . 

  Guidance on measures to ensure a safe environment , and issues related to health and safety at work . 

  The following activities and exercises may be pursued individually or in groups , and may provide a framework for individual study leading to personal or group presentations in seminars or workshops , dependent on the resources available and the provisions made for personal study in the course curriculum or re-orientation programme . 

  The Fragments 

  Big Flame 

  According to the legend , the story of News on Sunday began in 1978 with twenty-four-year-old Ben Lowe gazing moodily out of the aircraft window on a flight back from Canada to England . 

  He was not looking forward to his return . 

  His last two years had been spent taking a master's degree in political science at Queen's University , Kingston . 

  Now time had run out and he was about to be plunged back into the horrible reality of his own miserable country , and particularly its miserable politics . 

  Sighing , he leafed through the English newspapers , the first he had really looked at for months . 

  The usual filth . 

  Biased rubbish , distortions , Tory propaganda , consumer pap , trivia , silly stories -- they had not changed . 

  If anything , they'd got worse . 

  How could people buy this stuff ? 

  No wonder they were getting a raw deal . 

  As he sipped his drink his mood grew darker . 

  Something should be done about it . 

  People should be given a chance to read a proper newspaper -- one that was decent , honourable and humane . 

  One that reflected his belief in full-blooded socialism , a belief he was sure so many of them shared . 

  It was their right . 

  His thoughts drifted to his own future , which at that time was uncertain . 

  What was he going to do when he was back ? 

  Put up with it all like everybody else , he supposed glumly . 

  Moan about it and do nothing like all of them . 

  Then , floating at 30,000 feet above the icebergs of the North Atlantic , he was struck by the Great Idea . 

  He , Ben Lowe , would start the newspaper of the new dawn , the paper that would restore faith in the discredited medium , the paper that would be not just a paper , but far more . 

  Dare he think it -- the paper that would be the basis for a new political movement that would sweep the country . 

  The paper for the people . 

  If you ask Ben Lowe if this account of events is true , he smiles self-deprecatingly and says shyly : " Not quite . " 

  But then Ben Lowe is not the stuff of which legends are made . 

  And he is quite adamant about one thing -- the paper was his idea , whatever anybody else involved with News on Sunday may claim . 

  Lowe had not gone to Canada for just academic reasons . 

  Part of his decision to study abroad had been a personal protest against the ditching of full-blooded socialism by Harold Wilson's Labour government . 

  Like all left-wingers , Lowe loathed Wilson , who had been elected in 1974 on the back of the wave of industrial militancy which culminated in the miners' strike of that year . 

  But instead of getting on with the revolution , which Lowe believed was Wilson's historic duty , Harold had immediately " sold out " to the capitalists by adopting right-wing policies approved by NATO and the International Monetary Fund . 

  By the time Lowe settled down back in London , Wilson had bowed out and handed the mantle of Leader of the Labour Party and Guardian of British Socialism to James Callaghan , the right-wing Labour MP for Cardiff . 

  Lowe watched , his lip curling , as avuncular " Farmer Jim " took Wilson's mastery of the new political art of the television interview to fresh heights of reassuring vacuousness . 

  Lowe blamed the newspapers and television for transforming the storm clouds of revolution he had sensed as an undergraduate at Sussex University into this thin drizzle of social democracy . 

  The media were going to enormous lengths to lure " the people " away from their revolutionary destiny into the gaudy sideshows of consumerism . 

  But his contact with the " real people " had , to be honest , been limited . 

  He was a baby-faced product of the concerned middle classes , born in Derby and whisked off to the Home Counties at an early age . 

  He was very bright , and sailed through the Royal Grammar School at High Wycombe to Sussex University , where he arrived in 1972 to read Languages . 

  Although interested in politics , Lowe had little in common with the industrial militants who dominated the political stage in the early 1970s . 

  His style was that of the laid-back , softly spoken , pro-feminist new man , a long way from the aggressive , blustering , male chauvinist approach of most trade-union militants . 

  Their vision rarely seemed to extend beyond the size of their pay packets or of the tits in the vile papers they read . 

  Lowe still believed " the workers " , with their industrial muscle , were the key to the British revolution . 

  But he was sniffily dismayed at their delight in consumerism and sheep-like attitude to the reactionary rubbish in the papers . 

  He was proud that he , and others like him , had not fallen for the con-trick . 

  Lowe's interests extended to a wide range of issues -- sexual politics , the environment , nuclear disarmament , anti-racism -- all of which had emerged from the 1960s hippy and student-based protest movements . 

  Although his conservative clothing and mild manners did not show it , he was becoming a " Right-On " , and he would support anything on the new agenda . 

  This gave him an endless shopping list of radical causes which had no apparent connection , but were bound together by the radical-chic lifestyle of their supporters . 

  His quiet rage about the papers , and the idiots who paid good money for them , grew more intense as he began to grind away in a job as a research assistant at the Financial Times . 

  He read the whole range of papers on most days , and was appalled by their cynical and gleeful exploitation of Callaghan's faltering stand against what was labelled " mindless militancy " at Labour's grass roots . 

  The coverage seemed to be for the exclusive benefit of the Tory Party . 

  If causes dear to his heart , such as feminism , even figured at all in the mass-circulation papers , it was to serve as the butt for an endless stream of cheap jokes . 

  The only paper which stood out against the tide was the Communist Party's Morning Star . 

  But its only function seemed to be promoting the image of its Soviet paymasters and flattering its dwindling readership of old age pensioners and trade-union officials . 

  For once Right-On people like Lowe were in total agreement with the rest of the population -- the Morning Star was a write-off , its credibility rating below zero . 

  Then there were the dozens of papers produced by the various Trotskyite sects , the largest of which , in circulation terms , were Socialist Worker and Socialist Challenge . 

  If there was a strike or industrial dispute Socialist Worker and Socialist Challenge sellers would rush to the gates to lecture workers on how they would lose their " struggle " if they stopped short of Permanent World Revolution . 

  Their newspapers existed solely to point this out , and were designed to lead readers to the inescapable conclusion that what was needed was a new political party , free from the sell-outs of the Labour Party and the trade-union leaders . 

  To do this , unfortunately , meant filling the pages of their papers with the depressing and unfathomable minutiae of far-left politics . 

  On the other hand , some of these papers had real flair . 

  Socialist Worker , edited by Paul Foot , was a passable imitation of the Daily Mirror , and the International Marxist Group's Socialist Challenge was edited by the imaginative and talented former student revolutionary leader Tariq Ali , who was 100 per cent Right-On . 

  Their individual circulations were tiny . 

  But , Lowe wondered , what if they pooled their resources and produced a paper jointly ? 

  If they abandoned factory-gate sales for proper commercial distribution through newsagents , the combined circulations might add up to something worthwhile . 

  Lowe , who loves playing with figures , did some research and estimated sales could reach as many as 400,000 -- more than the FT where he worked , and a respectable figure at the quality end of Fleet Street . 

  The trouble was that there was no chance of getting the sects to co-operate . 

  Their hatred for each other was even greater than for the capitalist enemy , and they were constantly locked in internecine warfare in which they accused each other . of a battery of heinous crimes . 

  The charge sheet varied . 

  It could be " neo-Stalinism " ( refusing to say Russia was a capitalist country ) ; " Pabloite revisionism " ( deciding to join the Labour Party secretly ) ; " tailism " ( waiting for trade unions to organize strikes rather than getting on with it yourself ) ; " liquidationism " ( dissolving the sect into a larger movement , hoping that its ideas will catch on ) ; " parliamentary cretinism " ( advising people to vote Labour ) ; " stageism " ( not demanding everything at once ) ; or even " centreism " ( expressing a liking for Tony Benn ) . 

  Lowe knew the sects and the papers they churned out were going nowhere . 

  They were stuck in the ghetto . 

  Now , as he started making notes to put the Great Idea into more concrete form , he proposed a paper that would be only " quasi-revolutionary " and therefore have a wider appeal , and " non-sectarian " , so it would not be in hock to one particular sect or group . 

  Lowe had the seed of a good idea , and there was some encouragement . 

  A new approach was being mooted in the heaving undergrowth of ultra-left literature . 

  People were tiring of old-style " workerist " ultra-left politics and standing at factory gates being laughed at by the very workers they were supposed to be leading to the new Jerusalem . 

  Attention was switching to continental groups such as the Italian " autonomists " , who rejected the fruitless and mind-numbing discipline and line-toeing demanded by the other builders of the New Revolution . 

  Right-Ons like everything about Italy , where even the Fascists are nattily dressed . 

  The autonomists proposed networks of similarly minded Right-On people , separately involved in all manner of " struggles " . 

  They had a revolutionary theory that the combined effect of all these " struggles " would be to needle and irritate the capitalist system until it finally collapsed in an exhausted heap and died . 

  Various papers and magazines were beginning to thrive in this new atmosphere . 

  Spare Rib was already well established , and was joined for a period by the Leveller , another collective magazine , and the East End News , which produced the first attempt to appeal to " the masses " of East London by dressing up Right-On concerns in chirpy Chas'n'Dave-style modernized Cockney . 

  And the new Italian thinking was beginning to affect the sects themselves . 

  To any outsiders curious enough to look -- and there were not many -- the Liverpool-centred party-cum-discussion group Big Flame seemed identical to any other of the tiny Trotskyite grouplets . 

  But although it had the standard minute membership and tatty newspaper hawked erratically round student unions , shopping precincts and Tube stations , Big Flame was different . 

  It had absorbed the autonomist Right-On thinking and described itself not as a political party as such , but as " The Revolutionary Socialist Organization " . 

  Big Flame was based on the Italian revolutionary group Lutte Continua ( the struggle goes on ) , which sought to combine the autonomist belief in a loose network of Right-On groups with a separate political party which would guide them all . 

  It was a neat idea , and one which placed it half way between the rigid discipline of the Trotskyites and the hopeless chaos of the Anarchists ( or Libertarians , as they preferred to call themselves ) on the ultra-left spectrum . 

  And Big Flame had a reputation for humanity compared with other ultra-left sects with their habit of expelling people en masse in a hail of jargon-ridden abuse , and demanding Moonie-type self-criticism from slackers who failed to meet newspaper sales quotas . 

  To join you had to say you believed in all the usual stuff about the Working Class leading the Revolution , but a general interest in being nice to people was all that was really required . 

  It was a sort of revolutionary version of the Lions Club . 

  The nearest equivalent at the time was Peter Hain's Young Liberals . 

  People who knocked about the revolutionary left at the time still remember Big Flame fondly as a fundamentally nice organization . 

  It started life in Liverpool in 1971 and took its name from a television drama-documentary on the declining port's dockers , who were constantly being " sold out " by the local trade-union branches . 

  The aim was to attract intelligent revolutionaries disgusted by the ramshackle right-wing local Labour Party and the once influential Communist Party . 

  As with all ultra-left groups , its members' political lives were overshadowed by the dreadful possibility of a sell-out -- the biggest danger in ultra-left politics , and always on the cards . 

  Leon Trotsky had said that a socialist revolution in Britain was being prevented by one thing alone -- the habit of the leaders of the Labour Party and trade unions to compromise with the ruling class by becoming part of the system . 

  The biggest example had been the General Strike of 1926 when a settlement was negotiated with Churchill . 

  It had happened time and time again , and the Trotskyist answer was " democratic centralism " , an authoritarian form of discipline by which anybody suspected of a sell-out was expelled , keeping the organization pure . 

  The anarchist solution was more imaginative -- neatly avoiding the possibility of sell-out by having no leaders at all . 

  The sell-out concept was inherited by all Right-On people , and became a central part of their thinking . 

  But most thought the anarchist " no leaders " approach was silly . 

  Leaders were to be tolerated as long as they were not permanent , and as long as they were held constantly " accountable " . 

  Right-On movements such as the feminists and the peace campaigners evolved complicated systems to ensure this happened . 

  Spokespeople or representatives had constantly to justify their activities and statements to committees , which in turn would have to report back to steering groups and working parties elected by conferences and regional groups . 

  No person in a position of power was ever to be trusted , especially if he or she was on your side . 

  It was realized that " accountability " often resulted in organizational muddle and indecisiveness , and sometimes in sheer paralysis . 

  But this was a small price to pay for insurance against a leadership sell-out . 

  And the approach was said to have a huge plus-point as well . 

  Working on the principle that each person's experience is equally valuable , it then follows that if ten people ponder a decision , it will be ten times better . 

  Big Flame followed these principles and was therefore kept loosely structured . 

  The organization's broad philosophy and open-endedness allowed people to arrive carrying all manner of political baggage . 

  Henry Stewart , later to juggle many millions as News on Sunday's financial wizard , was a Big Flame Maoist who helped start operations in the north-east of England . 

  Others were Big Flame Feminists , Big Flame Pacifists or Big Flame Single-issue Campaigners . 

  Ben Lowe found the organization the perfect place for helping develop his idea of a " non-sectarian " national newspaper , so he joined as well . 

  Big Flame did not have permanent leaders , but it did have superstars . 

  One was Alan Hayling , who was later to play a central role in the story of News on Sunday . 

  Hayling is a man of considerable and obvious intelligence , with dishy looks and great charm which made him a favourite with some of the women comrades . 

  He cut a dashing figure at the many conferences he addressed , raising his hand from time to time to stroke his dark curly locks as he poured out pure reason in soft well-modulated tones with a sincerity that was almost painful . 

  Hayling's left-wing politics were to a large extent the result of his background . 

  His Jewish mother had narrowly escaped from Romania in the 19305 when the local Iron Guard goon squad began slaughtering Jews with a barbarity which sickened even their Nazi German allies . 

  She had fled to England as a refugee , and married his father , who was a teacher . 

  The family lived in London , where Hayling was born in 1949 . 

  When he was twelve , his father found a better post in Liverpool , and the family moved up north . 

  Hayling was a brilliant pupil at school and was soon marked down as Oxbridge material . 

  After a year spent in Uganda as a volunteer science teacher he passed the Cambridge entrance exam with ease and graduated with a double first in natural sciences in 1969 . 

  The world was at his feet . 

  Between long stints in the physics labs , Hayling had dabbled in student journalism and decided to make his career in the media . 

  But instead of working on Varsity , the established undergraduate paper , he was already determined to be different . 

  He and others set up a rival " underground " publication , the Shilling Paper , which , though a great success on its own terms , was useless as a credential for getting straight on to a Fleet Street paper such as the Sunday Times . 

  So Hayling , not interested in a normal local paper apprenticeship , tried television . 

  He was instantly offered traineeships by Granada in Manchester and the BBC in London . 

  He chose the BBC and was given a post in the Science Unit , where he was put straight on to making radio programmes . 

  His progress was predictably rapid , and after eighteen months he made the move to television , even though it was only as an assistant on Pets and Vets , an animal welfare show . 

  He quickly crossed to the peak-time Burke Report , and from there landed a plum assistant producer's job on the pop-science flagship Tomorrow's World . 

  Again he showed enormous potential , at once getting a feel for the audience and realizing people were interested in gimmicks and gadgets rather than dull , but more enlightening , scientific theory with pictures of boffins pottering about in laboratories . 

  But by now he was getting bored with the relative backwater of the Science Unit and wanted to go to News and Current Affairs , which was not only more glamorous , but offered a more direct opportunity to put his political ideals to good use . 

  His chance came with an offer of work on Children in Crossfire , a documentary about the psychological impact of terrorism and army occupation on the children of Northern Ireland . 

  But he immediately disagreed with the producer about the politics of the show , and was sent back to the Science Unit . 

  His transfer to current affairs was blocked -- the result , he still believes , of direct political discrimination . 

  Increasingly frustrated , he walked out in 1974 to help found Newsreel , an independent collective making films for the Labour movement . 

  Although Newsreel made some startlingly good documentaries , shortage of funds was a constant problem . 

  But at least Hayling was free to follow the dictates of his large and sometimes cumbersome political conscience . 

  In 1976 , just as he was planning to produce a film about the motor industry , Newsreel hit one of its frequent cash crises . 

  To combine research for the film with earning money , he took a job at Ford's Langley plant near Heathrow as a production-line worker in the body trim shop . 

  He found that he liked it . 

  Not the work , which was back-breaking and tedious -- he specialized in bolting on bumpers and screwing down steering wheels on trucks -- but the mostly Asian workforce whose respect and confidence he soon won as a shop-floor activist . 

  He stayed for seven years , at first steering clear of the official trade-union structure which , as a Big Flamer , he regarded as a huge sell-out . 

  Instead he concentrated on the unofficial Ford Workers' Combine , which bypassed the official union structure dominated by the Transport and General Workers' Union . 

  The Combine linked far-left activists and militants in Ford plants right across the country and , in theory , throughout the world . 

  In the early Liverpool days of Big Flame the comrades had been obsessed with the potential of Ford workers as leaders of the British revolution , and had put great effort into organizing and recruiting at the local Halewood plant . 

  And although " workerism " was on the wane by the time Hayling turned up on the Langley personnel officer's doorstep , he earned many brownie points among the comrades by becoming a " genuine " member of the proletariat . 

  By day Hayling would help organize the workers at Langley , and in the evenings he would throw himself into pressure-group work . 

  He helped set up the Troops Out movement which campaigned for withdrawal of the British army from Northern Ireland . 

  He became a close friend of Sheila Rowbotham , the feminist historian who , together with feminist economist Hilary Wainwright and Big Flamer Lynne Segal , wrote a book which was of enormous importance for the far left in the early 1980s -- Beyond the Fragments . 

  The theory behind Beyond the Fragments was simple . 

  The confident mood of the left in the 1960s had been part of a sudden wider upsurge in creativity concentrated on the arts , pop music , fashion , " lifestyle " and sexual attitudes . 

  But activists on the new Right-On " lifestyle " issues , such as sexual and racial equality and low-level economic development and ecology , had splintered into hundreds of fragmented pressure groups , local campaigns and tiny far-left political " parties " and discussion groups . 

  Many saw themselves as being above the grubby world of traditional politics and the professions , but often felt they could be like Richard Branson , the one-time hippy and promoter of alternative music who had joined the system and made a fortune . 

  The question was whether , in the harsher climate of the late 1970s and early 1980s , the fragments could be welded together to form a new force in British politics . 

  The various Right-On movements , especially the women's movement , had grown enormously during the years of the Wilson-Callaghan government . 

  The collapse of industrial militancy after the " Winter of Discontent " in 1978 and the defeat of the Labour government in the election of May 1979 had tipped the balance of power in the Right-Ons' favour . 

  They no longer lived in awe of their Big Brothers in the unions . 

  A conference inspired by Beyond the Fragments , was held in Leeds in September 1980 -- the first major Right-On gathering after the election which had ushered in the then relatively unknown doctrine of Thatcherism . 

  As a Big Flamer Ben Lowe , like Henry Stewart from Big Flame in Newcastle , made attendance top priority . 

  All this activity and talk of new Rainbow Alliances chimed perfectly with Lowe's newspaper plan , which he had always seen as partly being based on , and partly bringing about , greater co-operation on the far left . 

  His discussion paper on the subject had now been drafted and redrafted several times . 

  The trouble was that the paper never seemed to get off the ground , which was typical of the Big Flame and " Beyond the Fragments " approach . 

  The major flaw in attempting to get all the fractious fragments to work together , when nothing really united them except being Right-On , was the massive emphasis it placed on consensus . 

  Endless meetings were needed , and there was deep dread of taking decisions in case anybody objected and walked out , causing the whole fragile alliance to fall apart . 

  Meanwhile the various splinter groups , whether they subscribed to Big Flame or " Beyond the Fragments " ideas or not , viewed the post-election inquest in the Labour Party with their customary vulture-like intensity . 

  As events unrolled they sensed that the noisy disarray presented them with new opportunities . 

  Labour's traditional left wing , centring on the Tribune group , plunged into its normal Machiavellian schemings aimed at taking over the party . 

  The outlook was good . 

  Thatcherism was widely viewed at the time as a mad right-wing aberration which the people would not stand for long . 

  It faced certain doom either at the polls or at the hands of the National Union of Mineworkers . 

  Thatcher's rating in the opinion polls was crashing as the dole queues lengthened . 

  All the left needed to do was to ensure that the next Labour government was a real alternative , and not led by another tedious old right-winger like Callaghan , who had gone back to his farm blaming the lefties . 

  The left's moment of revenge came at the Labour special conference at Wembley in 1980 . 

  The conference approved a series of structural reforms giving constituency parties and the unions more power over the appointment of the leader . 

  The clear beneficiary was Tony Benn , who immediately launched a six-month campaign to have himself elected as deputy leader instead of the hated Denis Healey , who was , in the opinion of many , the architect of the sell-out of socialist economic policy during the Wilson-Callaghan government . 

  Benn's strategy was simple and well timed . 

  Picking up the scent from " Beyond the Fragments " , he wanted to weld together the traditional Labour left and the newer Right-On movements . 

  He encouraged Right-Ons to pile into the dilapidated inner-city party machines and replace the ageing right-wing old guard . 

  The new single-issue groups , he believed , represented a potential new element in Labour's complex power brokerage which might tip the balance of power decisively in his direction . 

  For months Benn stomped the country addressing as many meetings attended by fringe pressure groups as he could , telling them they were good people wasting their time outside the Labour Party . 

  But although thousands did heed him and join , it did not quite work . 

  The deputy leadership election was close . run , but in the end the party settled for the compromise of old-style left-winger Michael Foot , already in place as leader , with born-again " democratic socialist " Denis Healey as deputy . 

  The impression of division given by Benn's lengthy and vocal campaign , however , did immense damage to the party and the shambling , duffel-coated figure of Michael Foot walked straight into the delighted arms of the Tory press , which instantly fell on him and started taking him apart . 

  At first the arrival of considerable numbers of Benn-recruited Right-Ons in moribund inner-city Labour Party branches went unnoticed . 

  But , putting to use the superior education unwittingly handed to them by the state or paid for by their parents , they soon displaced the handfuls of old faithfuls . 

  Shocked old-guard MPs , who had imagined they were in cushy seats for life , suddenly found Right-Ons dominating their constituency parties with a potent mixture of brow-beating and attrition . 

  Another , even less visible , result of the Bennite rivalism was the demise of Big Flame as a formal organization . 

  Most of its best organizers and natural membership joined the Labour Party . 

  And although Big Flame was never an " entryist " party-within-a-party , like some of the Trotskyite groups , including Militant Tendency , everyone who had been part of it remained friends . 

  A useful network of ex-Big Flamers emerged both inside and outside the party . 

  Hayling and Lowe remained outside , though Lowe worked closely with Benn and wrote a pamphlet about NATO with him . 

  Whether or not they were former members of Big Flame , the International Marxist Group , or any of the other sects which now dissolved themselves into the Labour Party , the Right-Ons' most effective weapon was an endless capacity to attend even the most obscure meetings . 

  They used the skills acquired during the social science degree courses many of them had followed in the early 1970s to scrutinize rule books and exploit every line and loophole in their favour . 

  Tactics which had been honed in the petty but ruthless world of student-union politics were now deployed in party meetings with devastating results . 

  Throughout the press the cry went up of " extremist take-overs " and " packed meetings " . 

  The Right-Ons fired back the unanswerable reply that meetings belonged to those who attended them . 

  Cheery tombola social nights at local Labour Clubs were replaced by showings of Peter Watkins's brilliant but heart-stopping antinuclear film , The War Game , which the BBC had commissioned in the 1960s but still wimpishly refused to screen . 

  Similar grisly film delights , unsuitable for persons of a nervous , or even reasonably cheerful , disposition followed -- some made by Hayling and his Newsreel collective . 

  The GLC 

  Nowhere was the Right-On bandwagon more apparent than in London , where it culminated in the elevation of Ken Livingstone to the leadership of the controlling Labour group on the Greater London Council the day after the local elections in March 1981 . 

  Livingstone had formed his political views during the " new left " upheavals of the late 1960s . 

  In 1968 , the watershed year of the student riots in Paris , when most of the new generation of radicals were denouncing the Labour Party as hopelessly fuddy-duddy , he had joined up , believing it would one day become the focus for a new alliance of Right-On movements , Now , more than a decade on , his dream was starting to come true and the new radical politics were about to be released on an unsuspecting populace -- with mixed results . 

  Local government , with its responsibility for sweeping the streets and emptying dustbins , had always essentially been a humdrum business . 

  But this would never do for the gilded 1960s radicals . 

  Many had started off working in the field as social workers , teachers , architects , planners or just plain clerks . 

  Now , through their domination of the London Labour Party , they were running it , and they started putting into practice schemes hatched during their long hours in drab municipal offices . 

  Local government was no longer boring -- it was " where it was at " , and it became elevated to a collection of grandiose projects . 

  Suddenly " racism awareness " training , day nurseries , and sex-equality monitoring programmes were the order of the day . 

  " Chairs " were established , and town halls sprouted signs saying how many people were unemployed locally , although nothing effective was done about it . 

  There was a mushroom growth of grant-aided housing associations , community advice centres , radical theatre groups and co-operative bicycle repair shops . 

  The headquarters of the GLC , the great pile of County Hall , changed from being a tedious and unloved administrative centre to become the Right-On rival to the House of Commons directly across the River Thames . 

  The building was besieged by Right-Ons , many wearing dungarees and riding shiny hi-tech bicycles bought on credit in Covent Garden . 

  In a parallel development , the old fruit and vegetable market was rapidly becoming the Right-On commercial centre where trendy shopkeepers cashed in with their hand-knitted sweaters , ethnic crafts and designer clothing . 

  There was nothing new in the preoccupations of the Right-Ons . 

  Socialism has always attracted its fair share of cranks ; as long ago as 1937 , George Orwell wrote in The Road to Wigan Pier that the very word " Socialism " seemed to act like a magnet attracting " every fruit-juice drinker , nudist . sandal-wearer , sex maniac , Quaker , " Nature Cure " quack , pacifist and feminist in England " . 

  He surmised that Socialism would remain unpopular as long as critics were able to say : " I do not object to Socialism , but I do object to Socialists . " 

  But unlike their 1930s forebears , the 1980s Right-Ons had arrived in force . 

  And they were no longer held in check by the culturally conservative trade-union movement , which was experiencing a sharp decline in its prestige and power . 

  They swept the London Labour Party before them and established beach-heads in the other inner-cities . 

  Opinion about Ken Livingstone divided sharply . 

  No politician had ever acted like this before , and people were genuinely shocked . 

  The tabloid papers , which make their money from guessing the prejudices of their readers and dressing them up as informed opinion , had a field day . 

  But others thought : why not ? 

  Right-Ons were citizens and ratepayers too , and it was about time that local government began to represent them . 

  A minority slice of the population loathed Livingstone with as much passion as the Right-Ons loved him . 

  And in the middle was a larger group who had not yet formed an opinion . 

  These people were prepared to accept Fleet Street's verdict that he was insane . 

  But then again , most politicians were fairly mad . 

  And there was great admiration for Livingstone's transparent honesty , self-effacing modesty and determination to stick to his guns . 

  At least people knew where they stood with him , and the darkened corridors of local government , with their forbidding and ever-present whiff of graft and back-scratching , were now lit up in a blaze of publicity . 

  That made a pleasant change . 

  The aspect which was not so popular was the business of giving grants to all and sundry , which was whipped up and wildly exaggerated by the Tory press . 

  Until Livingstone , various Right-On pet publishing and campaigning projects had been largely confined to tedious discussion documents and papers wrangled over at interminable meetings . 

  Now that there was a sympathetic hand at the helm , especially for the new sexual politics , they were shaped into formal applications for local government funding . 

  A stream of long , earnest and often hopelessly bureaucratic ideas flowed into the system , all with the same object of getting some cash . 

  One of these was Ben Lowe's modest proposal to launch a new national newspaper . 

  Compared to the GLC's plan to make London immune to all-out thermonuclear war by placing signs on lamp posts , it was small beer . 

  Those Right-Ons who had written off the Labour Party for ever now began to chew humble pie , and were drawn to Livingstone's GLC as though to a magnet . 

  Jobs , as well as grants , were on offer , and people whom Lowe had met before started working there . 

  His most important contact was Hayling , who had left Ford in 1983 and now had a job monitoring multinational companies in the GLC's Industry and Employment Branch . 

  Hayling was also in charge of media initiatives , so Lowe naturally turned to him with the newspaper they had so often discussed as comrades in Big Flame . 

  The two men talked it over with Hayling's boss at the GLC , Hilary Wainwright , who was head of the Popular Planning Unit . 

  Wainwright was enormously enthusiastic , as she was about many things . 

  A leading Right-On thinker , she had co-written the Beyond The Fragments book which had started as a mere pamphlet , but had attracted so much interest that it had been upgraded and sold an extremely respectable 20,000 copies in paperback , having a major effect on its earnest readership . 

  Wainwright , an economist , possessed a first-class analytical brain powered by bundles of energy , and had lots of good political contacts within the Labour Party . 

  Although she had little time to help organize the newspaper project , as she buzzed around discussing it with friends and jotting down ideas it began to get up steam . 

  On paper News on Sunday was a brilliant idea . 

  Although to outsiders it was just a newspaper , to those in the know the concept went much further . 

  NoS would provide a focus to weld together the splinter groups of the left into an unstoppable force which would sweep the Labour Party before it . 

  The fragments would be reunited and the hated paunchy old men of the traditional Labour movement would be overthrown . 

  At the same time the tables would be turned so that they could actually be used to help finance the project , along with the Right-On councils which had already thrown financial caution to the winds . 

  The boring old unions would be pushed out by a new Rainbow Alliance of media-wise radicals , alert and campaigning on the big issues of racial and sexual discrimination , nuclear power , and protecting the environment . 

  The new obsessions , which were already making their mark in national politics abroad with parties such as the Greens in Germany , would take over . 

  The Big Flame would be rekindled . 

  A paper for the people 

  Even better for those who were thinking autonomously , the newspaper would cater for everybody who was Right-On . 

  Each group would be able to campaign for its particular obsession in public . 

  The wonderful vision arose of a publication which would be like the minutes of a gigantic nationwide meeting . 

  Every cause -- no matter how bizarre or obscure -- could be represented simply by writing a story about it . 

  Different causes and individuals could have their say on different pages , under an overall consensus umbrella which embraced correct Right-On thinking on all aspects of the paper's coverage -- from news to TV to sport . 

  And the newspaper itself could provide a stunning example with its own employment practices of how to run an organization on correct Right-On lines . 

  Blacks , gays , lesbians , the disabled and other disadvantaged people -- all could join in demonstrating how the new thinking could be combined with commercial success . 

  The paper would practise what it preached . 

  If Hayling had any doubts about swinging the GLC behind the paper , it was because of Ben Lowe's lack of experience and drive . 

  But then he had a brainwave . 

  Hayling had come across a man called Chris Walsh who was already getting funds from the GLC for his latest , faltering , business enterprise , a Third World Development unit based in Highbury , North London . 

  Hayling decided that the hyperactive Walsh , who was not afraid of any challenge , would be the perfect foil for the lugubrious and cautious Lowe . 

  The two men would complement each other perfectly . 

  Hayling met Walsh for lunch and explained the newspaper project . 

  They hit it off at once . 

  Since Walsh's Third World business was going nowhere , he was enthusiastic . 

  He got to work at once , and an eight-page Walsh " strategy document " , the first of many , whizzed back to Hayling in the post . 

  Hayling explained further that if the GLC was going to support the venture , Walsh would have to get some newspaper professionals -- or at least semi-professionals -- involved , including , of course , Ben Lowe . 

  Shortly afterwards Walsh brought in Liz Cooper , the circulation manager of the ailing New Statesman , and Kit Sadgrove , a former advertising-agency executive now in market research . 

  The GLC liked to work with committees , and one was formed with the addition of Mike Power , a Daily Mail compositor , trade-union activist and chairperson of the Campaign for Press and Broadcasting Freedom . 

  Together they wrote a short grant application , which Hayling pushed through the committees . 

  The project was awarded 750 for a detailed pre-feasibility study , with Hayling , in his GLC capacity , responsible for making sure the report was properly written and the grant money not wasted . 

  The Guardian , the only national newspaper remotely acceptable to Right-Ons , was the logical starting-point . 

  By now Ben Lowe had realized that a daily paper would be too difficult and costly , so the idea of starting a sort of Sunday Guardian seemed logical enough . 

  The Sunday Times , under Rupert Murdoch , was moving to the right , and Right-Ons now only had the weedy Observer , which was rapidly disappearing into the abyss of consumer journalism for the comfortable middle classes . 

  Since most Right-Ons would have been happy with a national version of a publication such as City Limits or Spare Rib , which specialized in redefining the world's priorities as their own , the comparison with the Guardian was daring . 

  Lowe was certain that if the paper was properly produced , with a GLC-funded journalistic team and regular national distribution , it could sell at least 250,000 and maybe 400,000 . 

  He did not think there was chance of more than that . 

  But his cautious frame of mind was already beginning to irritate some of the comrades . 

  After frustrating years in which they had covered acres of print discussing the sociological theory and implications of newspaper readership , they wanted to compete in the more popular market . 

  The defeat of the Labour Party for the second time in 1983 had been blamed largely on the media campaign which had glorified the Falklands , hammered Foot , and unleashed a campaign of unprecedented vitriol against Livingstone's GLC and the " Loony Left " . 

  It was time to hit back . 

  Livingstone himself had made a tentative start with the publication of the Londoner , a heavily subsidized but snappy tabloid free-sheet widely distributed throughout the GLC area . 

  The expenditure was justified by the argument that the newspaper industry existed to vilify the GLC and the rest of the left , and that the public was being denied the chance to hear the other side . 

  Fleet Street seemed to exist solely to praise the Tories and bolster the system . 

  The posh end of the market was dominated by new-wave consumer journalism which was turning into a grotesque parody of the " lifestyle " politics the Right-Ons had pioneered . 

  At the bottom end , the masses were being fed on a diet of bingo , moronic competitions and " news " reduced to a jumble of tits and bums , Tory propaganda and invented Royal Family rubbish . 

  The Sun was the most hated of the rabid tabloids , particularly for its " Page 3 girls " and jingoistic coverage of the Falklands , which had caused widespread revulsion with headlines such as STICK IT UP YOUR JUNTA , and the infamous GOTCHA ! on the sinking of the Belgrano . 

  For the concerned middle classes , who could barely bring themselves to look at it , it was a horrible , violent , raucous vehicle out to destroy anything progressive or Right-On . 

  Its huge success grated even more , especially as it had been a Labour paper until Murdoch had bought it and turned it into a cornerstone of his international media empire . 

  But there was little they could do about it except wring their hands at each fresh horror in its columns , analyse its transparently partisan coverage , and point out how its competitors were dragging their standards downmarket to try to keep up with its soaraway sales . 

  Most puzzling was that the worse it got , the more people bought it , and -- horror of horrors -- it was cheerfully read in large numbers by the very people who suffered from the hackneyed prejudices and stereotypes it dispensed -- notably blacks , gays and women . 

  For the Right-Ons , many of whom had committed the cardinal mistake of taking other people's newspapers too seriously , it was inconceivable that this diet of trash should be allowed to succeed . 

  It was now part of their ingrained thinking that the newspaper barons were imposing their standards on the population by rewriting the language of tabloid journalism . 

  The proles were being forced to put up with this stuff because there was no alternative . 

  Secretly ( because the papers would never report it ) , behind the scenes a huge demand was building up for a " decent " paper , one which -- dare they say it -- would Tell the Truth . 

  Another worry was now added to the complaints . 

  Just as linotype operators at the Sun were breaking out the champagne to celebrate the arrival of 1,000 pay packets for a three-day week , the realization was beginning to dawn that sooner or later the power of the print unions would be broken by the introduction of new technology . 

  In the north-west Eddie Shah was starting to emerge as a hate figure as he replaced highly skilled union labour on his string of local papers with girls fresh from secretarial colleges . 

  Shah was setting in motion a chain of events which would lead to the bitter Wapping strike , when Murdoch took on the print unions -- previously assumed to be invincible -- and won . 

  The issue of jobs was now added to the left agenda , as the print workers finally lost their grip on the production jugular of the industry in the first fundamental update of print technology since the late Middle Ages . 

  So the idea of a mass-market paper for the Masses , rather than just the Concerned and Committed , began to surface . 

  It did not happen overnight . 

  Most Right-Ons had to move from the Fleet Street " heavies " , the papers they actually read , to the unknown territory of the " pops " . 

  A mass-circulation paper was more risky , but it was much more exciting , and with the bigger sales that were on the cards , it could be very profitable . 

  After the " Sunday Guardian " came the next suggestion -- a left-wing Mail on Sunday . 

  The snag in all this thinking was that most of the people involved knew little or nothing about producing mass-market newspapers . 

  Lowe had worked as a researcher for the Financial Times , Hayling had done his stint with the BBC , and of course they had dabbled in the Big Flame paper and other fringe publications . 

  Then Hayling brought in News on Sunday's first top-drawer professional -- John Pilger . 

  Hayling simply rang him up , in the way that he was to cold-call others , asked for his help , and got it . 

  Other good journalists , such as the Observer columnist Neal Ascherson and the ex- New Socialist editor and media studies lecturer James Curran , came and went , along with many lesser colleagues . 

  Pilger was immediately sympathetic . 

  He was an immensely experienced journalist , but had never found anything to match the heyday of the Daily Mirror under Hugh Cudlipp in the 1960s . 

  In those days the paper had sold 5.25 million copies and had been respected for its powerful , picture-led campaigning journalism , its commitment to the Labour Party , and the chord it struck with its primarily working-class readership . 

  Pilger was by now well into his forties and , like many other good campaigning journalists , more and more like a beached whale , increasingly irrelevant in the cynical new world of slick and sick journalism . 

  For journalists like him , and others who had made their names digging out scandals such as Poulson , Jeremy Thorpe , Thalidomide , and police corruption , or by trying to engage the sympathy of the nation and the government for the oppressed in society , life was becoming more and more difficult . 

  Editors increasingly saw only the downside of tedious and expensive court actions and official or semi-official government pressure . 

  They could do without it . 

  And Pilger , an exasperatingly prickly individualist determined to expose the ills of the world , stubbornly refused to lower his standards and fit in with the new requirements . 

  When Hayling invited him in , Pilger listened to the Sunday Guardian versus left-wing Mail on Sunday argument . 

  But he refused to compare the projected newspaper to anything on the present market , and insisted that only he could shape it . 

  All he would say was that the paper would be completely new , but would hark back to the great days of the Mirror . 

  Lowe , a man of more modest vision , had a train-spotter's fascination for numbers which enabled him to take refuge in " scientific " figures that endorsed his shyly offered judgements . 

  He now proposed that the fundamental gut decision of whether the paper should be tabloid or broadsheet be tested by market research , until he was finally talked out of it by another newly recruited professional -- Clive Thornton , lately of Mirror Group Newspapers . 

  Thornton , a small , stocky , bespectacled figure with a Geordie twang from his Newcastle upbringing , was invited to join as an adviser by Lowe . 

  He had come to the comrades' attention when he wrote an article in the journal of the Right-On wing of the Communist Party , Marxism Today , shortly before the 750 GLC pre-feasibility study was completed in November 1984 . 

  Thornton had just left the Mirror Group after a brief but interesting spell in newspapers . 

  He had been brought in by the conglomerate owners , Reed International , who were planning to float the Mirror Group off as a separate company and wanted someone to mastermind the move . 

  Thornton was an unusual choice : his fame sprang from his period as chief executive of the Abbey National building society , where he had swept aside years of tradition , brought in a new management style ( he was very proud of having abolished fifty-one committees ) , and had enormous success with initiatives such as Granny Bonds . 

  When Thornton started at the Daily Mirror he found the usual chronic Fleet Street over-staffing , and began to swing the axe to enable the paper to stand on its own two feet and ward off the inevitable predators , such as Rupert Murdoch and Robert Maxwell . 

  But instead of just getting rid of jobs , as a " committed expansionist " , Thornton started work on plans to keep the unwanted staff , whom he described as " almost to a man , dedicated , hard-working folk " . 

  Thornton's answer was a new left-of-centre Sunday tabloid , a " seventh day Mirror " , provisionally entitled the Globe . 

  The paper was planned in enormous secrecy to run alongside the existing Sunday Mirror , which he thought had become " a soft , ladies' paper " . 

  The Globe was designed to sell in large numbers -- anything under half a million was not worth considering . 

  The second venture was a new London evening paper to challenge the Standard's monopoly . 

  He was just warming to his task when Reed sold him out . 

  Unbeknown to him , it had been negotiating with Robert Maxwell , and sold the Daily Mirror behind his back . 

  When he walked into the office the next day he found the new proprietor's considerable bulk squeezed into his own chair , took the point and resigned . 

  He eventually collected a 300 , 000 pay-off . 

  Maxwell , rooting about in his new office high up in the Daily Mirror's Holborn tower block , found Thornton's Sunday paper plan sitting in the in-tray and immediately rubbished it publicly as " evidence " of Thornton's uselessness . 

  But he took the evening paper suggestion more seriously , and it eventually emerged as the London Daily News , which was changed ambitiously at the last minute into Britain's first twenty-four-hour " rolling newspaper " , aimed at pulling both evening and morning sales . 

  Despite some fine writers and good design , the paper was to fall heavily between two stools , and closed down ignominiously in July 1987 after its circulation had slumped to 90,000 . 

  The exercise cost Maxwell 30 million . 

  After leaving the Mirror , Thornton returned to his Lincolnshire home to potter about with his prize heifers . 

  But he had been bitten by the newspaper bug , and various groups of disaffected newspaper people , including disgruntled employees and ex-employees of The Times and the Sunday Times , approached him with a number of implausible journalistic ventures . 

  He even " floated bread on the water " , as he put it , with Harold Evans , the former editor of the Sunday Times who inspires guru-scale admiration among many hacks . 

  But although he listened politely to these ideas , Thornton became irritated that none of the people had done any business sums . 

  As a man of action -- as he never tired of telling people -- he had stuck his multi-million-pound Granny Bond idea together on the back of an envelope in a couple of hours after the introduction of Budget changes which made it possible . 

  He was just beginning to get heartily sick of the whole newspaper business , when Hayling phoned to follow up Ben Lowe's letter of invitation . 

  Pleasantly surprised by how close News on Sunday was to his Globe plan , he agreed to meet . 

  There was another pleasant surprise -- Hayling and Lowe had actually done some work and had something on paper . 

  Thornton , who prefers to follow a gut feeling , told them they had to move fast . 

  There was a gap in the market which would not last for ever . 

  The Mirror Group would soon be back on its feet . 

  Any delay would be fatal . 

  They nodded and invited him to a meeting . 

  Thornton is remembered by Hayling , Lowe and the others involved early in the project as being " difficult " . 

  His " crimes " , as they saw it , started when he insisted that if there had to be meetings they must be businesslike , properly chaired and follow the agenda . 

  He had found the agendas clogged with " all sorts of odds and ends , trivia and red herrings " . 

  And when he tried transparent tricks to pull up vital business buried at the end of the list , he found himself making a number of enemies in the group . 

  Worse , although Thornton knew that Hayling saw himself as a potential chief executive , he demanded that the business side of the paper be immediately put under the direction of " an upfront businessman with a solid track record " . 

  Editorial direction should also be handed to an upfront , well-established journalist . 

  He did not think having been a member of Big Flame was a qualification for either post . 

  Thornton's demands caused consternation . 

  Behind his back the group threw the Right-On book at him and , deeply paranoid as they were , came to the only possible conclusion . 

  Thornton was trying to hijack their project -- the baby they had nursed to its first hesitant steps . 

  Co-operating with him might lead to a sell-out before they had even started . 

  They were convinced he was plotting to make himself chief executive -- a charge he recalls with a wry grin and shake of the head . 

  Everything was wrong with him -- he would not always come to meetings and when he did he was " difficult " . 

  They decided that he was only in it for himself and was not the sort of person the comrades wanted to have with them , and definitely not part of the consensus . 

  Nevertheless , Thornton could not be ditched straight away . 

  They had approached a GLC body , the Greater London Enterprise Board ( GLEB ) , for money and been told that if it was to put money in , an established business person had to be involved . 

  The only one interested at that time was Thornton , so he had to stay for the moment . 

  The original 750 grant from the GLC was one thing , but huge sums would be needed to get the real paper off the ground . 

  Lowe had already calculated launch costs as at least 4 million . 

  They wanted to raise as much of this money as possible from the City ; Thornton assured them that he could fix it if they did what he said . 

  This was good news , but they did not want to rely entirely on him . 

  Instead they decided to get money from GLEB and the trade unions to do a proper feasibility study -- one which would deliver an unanswerable case for investment . 

  They would then be able to go to the City on their own , and not Thornton's , terms . 

  Thornton hammered at them that there was a " window of opportunity " which had to be grasped . 

  He laid out the argument : the Mirror had gone to Maxwell and dived downmarket , along with its Sunday counterpart ; the Mail on Sunday was repositioning itself after its disastrous launch , but had still not recovered . 

  There was a gap which nobody had yet stepped into . 

  The Sunday market was still far larger than the daily market , though it had shrunk by 20 per cent in the 1970s . 

  The heavyweight Sunday Times , Sunday Telegraph and Observer were more or less holding their own . 

  But the populars had been harder hit . 

  The market leader , the News of the World ( sister paper of the Sun ) , was down to 4.2 million , a loss of 2 million in a decade , by the spring of 1984 . 

  Although it was recovering after a revamp , only it and the Mail on Sunday , boosted by massive spending on advertising , were actually gaining readers . 

  There were several reasons for this decline . 

  Church-going was being abandoned in favour of the new religion of DIY and other time-consuming pursuits , and research showed that only 3 per cent of the population still indulged in the great British institution of the Sunday lie-in , paper included . 

  In the " pops " market , the distinction between the Sundays and the dailies was becoming fuzzy . 

  It was no longer necessary to wait until Sunday for a dose of smut and scandal , when the Sun was offering it six days a week . 

  But there was some evidence from the launch of the Mail on Sunday that the missing readers could be lured back by new papers . 

  And there was a hunch that " heavy " newspaper readers would be attracted by a tasteful paper with plenty of news , but which could be read quickly . 

  A left-of-centre paper combining easy tabloid reading with heavyweight news coverage looked like a good bet . 

  Thornton spelled out how the new technology was rapidly opening up the newspaper scene , and offering enormous cost-cutting possibilities . 

  The first paper to get it would be streets ahead of its rivals . 

  A new left-wing paper sympathetic to , and backed by , the trade unions could be the first to sign new staffing-level agreements and steal a march on the competition . 

  The comrades listened . 

  It was very interesting stuff . 

  But they explained there was still a long way to go . 

  A great many meetings needed to be held . 

  There were thousands of people to consult , movements to co-operate with , reports to be written , consultation and " accountability " structures to be built , agreements to be drawn up , codes and charters to be agreed . 

  That could not all happen overnight . 

  It was time for News on Sunday to set off on the trail of the people and organizations who had theorized about the prospects for a popular left-wing newspaper for so long . 

  Now they were going to be given a chance to put their money where their mouths were . 

  And the person who was going to lead them to this golden opportunity was the new driving force who had come to the fore and already earned himself the nickname of " the Eddie Shah of News on Sunday " -- Chris Walsh . 

  Walsh was a man who had surfaced in public life before . 

  But the last time he had been in the headlines , people had known him by a different name -- Chris Bott . 

  Mysteries of the orgasm 

  Getting things moving 

  " Orgasm , organism , organisation : the coming together of life forces to overwhelm the present constraints and repressions . 

  Communality generalised . 

  The libido building its own organisation . 

  An organised resistance to op-pression , but the building of new social relations , the realisation of desires now , taking place within the organisation as part of the struggle for state power and a new society in the future . 

  An organisation embodying what its members want out of life now , the beginning of totality through total opposition , and what we do to change the world being enjoyable in itself , not a sacrifice " 

  The words of Chris Bott , anarchist or , more politely , " libertarian left " , as laid out in giant 36-point type and printed in lurid blue on a red background on the cover of Ink , one of the crop of underground papers that sprang up at the end of the 1960s . 

  Bott was given huge amounts of space on the inside pages of Ink in December 1971 and January 1972 to set out the scrambled views on life which he was culling from a variety of standard left-wing and anarchist gurus . 

  Prominent in his thinking at the time was Wilhelm Reich , the advocate of the practice of free love , which he believed would bring all power systems crashing to the ground . 

  Hence Bott's concentration on orgasm . 

  Ink was not advocating Bott as a philosopher . 

  The point about his thoughts , spelled out in a series of letters , was his current address -- Brixton prison . 

  There , as prisoner number 100485 , he was being held on remand , charged with maliciously conspiring to cause explosions likely to endanger life . 

  He was one of the Stoke Newington Eight -- the Angry Brigade . 

  The Angry Brigade was the cause clbre of the libertarian left during this period , for carrying direct action beyond the usual sit-ins , street theatre and noisy disruptions and demonstrations aimed at " authority " and prominent politicians . 

  It publicized itself with a series of military-style " communiqus " to the papers , with dire threats against the " pigs " and slogans such as : " Blow it up , burn it down , kick it till it breaks . " 

  Moving into action , it then carried out a series of bombings , the most serious of which almost destroyed the private house of the Home Secretary , Robert Carr . 

  The Angry Brigade never killed anyone . 

  All the attacks were against property , and nobody was hurt . 

  And the only thing Chris Bott had murdered was the English language . 

  But , before the IRA and Middle Eastern terrorists made such things part of everyday life in Britain in the 1970s , the bombings caused huge outrage . 

  The furore was increased by the ham-fisted police hunt for those responsible . 

  Eventually more than ten people , including Bott , were arrested and spent over a year in jail before the end of the lengthy legal proceedings . 

  The Old Bailey trial lasted 111 days , a new legal record . 

  Four of the Stoke Newington Eight -- John Barker , James Greenfield , Anna Mendelson and Hilary Creek -- were convicted and given ten-year jail sentences . 

  Four others -- Angela Weir , Catherine McLean , Stuart Christie and Bott -- were acquitted . 

  Chris had a normal middle-class background , with the exception of the fact that he had been adopted and brought up in Sutton Coldfield by step-parents called Bott . 

  He went to Strathclyde University and then on to Essex in 1968 . 

  Described in press coverage of the Angry Brigade trial as a " compulsive joiner of revolutionary movements throughout Europe " , he dropped out of his Latin American studies course to go to Paris during the student riots of May 1968 . 

  The experience convinced him that Europe was on the brink of revolution , and he threw himself into revolutionary Anarchist " Situationism " , which rejected conventional left-wing political parties . 

  Drifting from Essex to Manchester and then London , Bott became a well-known figure on the briefly blossoming " libertarian left " or " underground scene " . 

  In May 1970 he met Hilary Creek , another libertarian activist . 

  Creek had an affair with Bott , and was also involved with John Barker , who , together with James Greenfield , emerged as the backbone of the group accused of the bombings . 

  Barker and Greenfield were working-class lads who both arrived at Cambridge University in 1968 and were repelled by their first ever contact with the upper classes . 

  Greenfield told the court he had regarded the university as a " playground for the wealthy " and decided , whatever he did with his life , it would not be to help the rich get richer and more powerful . 

  The two men dropped out of their courses , moved to Stoke Newington in North London and stuck together as they became involved in the libertarian and squatter movements . 

  After the trial Bott continued to knock around his old haunts in Stoke Newington and the East End , gaining a professional qualification in urban planning which he used in community work with the homeless and unemployed . 

  He worked for a time with Stopover House and the Newham Alternative Project , both designed to provide temporary help for the poor and homeless of the East End . 

  But although he learnt such skills as writing feasibility studies , he soon tired of life in the grant-aided voluntary sector . 

  He wanted to get out of the old activist scene and transform himself into a modern , successful businessman . 

  All round his dingy housing-association flat in Stoke Newington , close to Amhurst Road , where he had been arrested at the beginning of the 1970s , were the signs of the new affluence . 

  A wine bar called Fox's had opened up a short walk away in Church Street , causing such amazement that the Observer printed an article about it . 

  Bott wanted to be part of this new success story , along with the City people , young designers , clothes merchants , media persons and trendy local-authority and institutional workers -- the Yuppies and Yeppies . 

  His first commercial venture was the Aardvark Transport and Trading Company , based in Wapping . 

  It had sprung from his activities in the housing movement , but was run on straight commercial lines , providing an " alternative " removals service and producing a nice sideline in salvaged Victorian fireplaces which were sold to the new rich . 

  Aardvark taught him that the left was not just a movement but a market . 

  He cut off his shoulder length hair , put on a suit , and started dealing with bankers . 

  Associates were shocked by the transformation , and joked that he had become a plain-clothes policeman . 

  Now he believed that the people who supported left-wing causes , and shared in movements concerned with issues such as squatting , nuclear disarmament , ecology and environment , provided a cohesive group to be sold to . 

  And although many of them might be poor in some ways , that did not mean they had no money to spend . 

  Walsh's thinking was based on the theory known in economic jargon as " reverse income substitution effect " . 

  This postulates that , although some groups may not have much money in relative terms , they will spend more in defined sectors . 

  Students , because their money is not tied up in big items such as mortgages , spend a lot on goods such as jeans , beer and cheap travel , and are therefore a target group . 

  On the back of this approach , which is sound enough , he was to evolve complicated and hopelessly over-ambitious merchandising plans . 

  By the time he got involved with the newspaper project , Bott had changed his name ; he was now Chris Walsh . 

  There was nothing sinister about this change -- he had simply reverted to the name he was born under after a search to find the identity of his real parents . 

  Although Walsh's main aim was to become a successful businessman , he kept most of his old political views , which were different from those of the other people starting up News on Sunday . 

  He brought with him the " direct action " theory and practice of the libertarian left . 

  Politics for people like him was not what you said , but what you did . 

  The contrast with Ben Lowe , the blushing withdrawn original founder whom he increasingly pushed to one side , could not have been more marked . 

  Lowe represented what had always been the basis of the project until then -- the concerned , upmarket readership of Right-Ons which was the perfect setting for a talking-shop . 

  But Walsh got stuck into the project with typical determination . 

  He was quite clear about the paper he wanted . 

  It was to be politically left , but above all popular , and designed to appeal to a big readership . 

  He was contemptuous of soggy , concerned lefties and wanted the paper to be outrageous , noisy , controversial -- an angry two-fingered salute to everyone in power -- right , left or centre . 

  Extrovert , cheerful and bursting with half-baked ideas and projects , he did not see things the way the talkers did . 

  What they saw as a problem , he saw as a challenge . 

  He was thinking big , and thinking big meant a huge readership -- a paper like the Mirror , to be read in equally large numbers by ordinary people who shared his contempt for organized politics . 

  He was not interested in the heavy political stuff which bored the pants off most people . 

  The required approach , rather like Walsh himself , was short , rude and snappy . 

  Thornton had been pushing for the same sort of readership , and the two men had another thing in common -- they wanted action . 

  Things must be got moving . 

  But Walsh's position was not as polarized as Thornton's with regard to the others . 

  He realized that there must be meetings , and he was prepared to go to them and fire off his battery of buzz words which signified he was " one of us " . 

  He had been around the scene for long enough to know how to manipulate meetings without getting everyone's back up . 

  His loathing for committee-bound inactivity was not new . 

  In his outpourings to the readers of Ink he had compared bureaucrats to the police , the army and prison officers . 

  Instead of traditional forms of organization , which for the Labour movement meant committees and conferences , Walsh confusingly advocated " the overthrow of the present set-up , the development of self-organisation , of consciousness , of strategy , power , for this to take place , the creation of community resources , shared pleasure , the spreading of present alienation " . 

  But at the same time he had another libertarian trait -- he was shambolically organized . 

  Nothing was worth doing unless it gave pleasure , he had argued in Ink . 

  And being organized did not give him pleasure . 

  For a start he was a night-bird , and would often only surface in the middle of the day . 

  He did not like the tedious business of routine , and rapidly became notorious in the group for missing meetings and failing to make appointments . 

  The complications of the laborious paperwork and endless reports of minutes which obsessed other members of the project held no interest for him . 

  He often only glanced at the reports . 

  Like Thornton , his philosophy was to back his hunches and do it now . 

  The rest he saw as just bureaucracy . 

  Walsh thought that if it was left to the others they would go on talking for ever . 

  Unlike them , he had " a strategy " . 

  Outside his own environment , however , in the more sober and conservative world of conventional business , Walsh worried people . 

  Thornton knew of various incidents which confirmed his opinion that Walsh made a distinctly negative impression in the hunt for backers . 

  A typical occasion was when Thornton used his contacts to set up a meeting between the paper and the trade-union-sponsored Unity Bank to borrow 10,000 to keep things going for now , and to test the water for the millions of pounds that would be needed in the future . 

  The meeting was not a success . 

  Unity Bank's Terry Thomas , who represented another backer which it was hoped would look favourably on the project , the Labour Party-linked Co-operative Bank , turned them down flat . 

  Much of his decision was based on his assessment of Walsh and Hayling , who was also present , and of their business plan . 

  Walsh , bedecked with new suit and executive glasses , had pitched in with his usual aggressive style . 

  Head tilted back , and firing out ideas like a machine-gun in his nasal North London voice , he had presented himself as a man with his finger on the modem business pulse . 

  His conversation was spattered with recently mugged-up marketing and business phrases . 

  It all led to only two possibilities : he was either a whirling business genius or a complete headbanger . 

  And since he was in his late thirties and apparently without a cent to show for it , the conclusion was obvious . 

  Hayling , who was much smoother in his appearance and approach , just seemed to Thomas to be very ignorant of business and how it worked . 

  After the two had left , Thomas confided to Thornton that he found it quite extraordinary that these two people , who were so naive and inexperienced , could be at the top of what was supposed to be a concrete business proposal . 

  What they had told him about the paper was " positively negative " -- an endless list of what the paper was not going to do , rather than what it was going to do . 

  He could see no future in their hopelessly optimistic sales forecasts . 

  With this thumbs-down from a part of the financial world whose support was expected , Thornton was losing his " window of opportunity " argument . 

  It did not worry the comrades too much . 

  The Right-On alternative to the City was sitting under their noses in the form of the Greater London Enterprise Board . 

  The negotiations which followed were mainly handled by Alan Hayling . 

  Hayling was still not a formal member of the group starting the paper , but he was getting more and more interested , and in his official GLC capacity acted as a go-between between the paper and GLEB , smoothing over the difficulties and piloting the paper round bureaucratic pit-falls . 

  GLEB had been set up by the GLC in 1983 to provide venture capital to start up enterprises and provide jobs in the London area . 

  An endless stream of proposals had poured in for the 20 million a year it had to dispense . 

  Many of the earlier ones came to grief , especially workers' co-ops , where money was handed out for projects such as a vegetarian quiche restaurant in Deptford . 

  Some were simply misguided , others were closer to the edge of the law , but predictably many crashed . 

  However , GLEB made progress with more sane ideas , and was credited with creating or saving 2,000 jobs in 116 different enterprises . 

  Whether this added up in terms of cost per job was another matter . 

  When News on Sunday made an approach , GLEB was concentrating on how to replace the rapidly disappearing jobs in the print industry , and any proposal in this area was high-priority . 

  Critics of the organization say it gave away money indiscriminately , whilst its supporters maintain fiercely that all projects were minutely criticized for viability . 

  Certainly , as News on Sunday found out , it involved a vast amount of bureaucracy and meetings before any money was handed over . 

  By now , in 1985 , the GLC bandwagon was slowing down and the Department of the Environment had imposed swingeing cuts on GLEB's expenditure . 

  News on Sunday asked for money to produce a dummy newspaper , which would then be market-researched , and the results wrapped into a feasibility study . 

  The research would determine likely sales levels , and also settle the division between a left-wing Mail on Sunday , with projected circulation of 400,000 , and a " Sunday Guardian " selling 250,000 . 

  If the green light came on for either project , the paper would go straight to capitalization as a commercial company . 

  Investment would be sought from the City , councils , trade unions and rich individuals . 

  GLEB would be paid back with shares in the company when it was floated , and be given a say in the structure of the company . 

  The paper pitched for 56,000 . 

  GLEB offered 39,000 with strict conditions . 

  The funding money had to be matched pound for pound by other backers ; the people who believed in the paper had to put up 5,000 of their own money between them ; and the paper had to have a controlling group to protect it from an outside takeover which might change the political line . 

  This group also had to be made up on strict equal-opportunities lines , with the requisite number of minorities and women . 

  Two GLEB representatives , including information director John Palmer , previously a Guardian journalist , joined the NoS executive committee . 

  Walsh , with Hayling fronting the show to add that important touch of Cambridge class , threw himself into raising the matching funding required by GLEB . 

  He was given able assistance by Mike Power , a long-standing member of the Communist Party with high-level contacts in the left-wing unions . 

  Thornton had good contacts as well , and proved very useful in arranging meetings . 

  He was friendly with Ron Todd , the head of the giant Transport and General Workers' Union , with more than one million members . 

  The T and G was the paper's greatest union supporter from the beginning , and was to end up as the biggest single investor . 

  Thornton had also earned the respect of SOGAT , the print union , and Manchester City Council for his previous efforts to re-employ the redundant workers at the Daily Mirror plant in the city . 

  Although the amount NoS had to raise at this point was small compared with what was to come later , those involved say that in many ways it was harder work . 

  The unions posed the same problem as the City . 

  The proposal did not yet have concrete facts to back it up . 

  And the unions had also been through this scene recently . 

  At the beginning of the 1980s , the TUC had asked Lord McCarthy , a Fellow of Nuffield College , Oxford , to examine the feasibility of a daily newspaper sympathetic to the Labour movement . 

  There had been great difficulty raising the 40,000 contribution from the unions . 

  McCarthy's report had proposed a 6.7 million plan for a national daily along the lines of the Sun or the Mail , based in or near London , with a staff of 230 . 

  The paper would need a minimum circulation of 300,000 to make money , and with an annual expenditure of 13.3 million would make an annual profit of 6.4 million if it reached a circulation of 500,000 But the idea never got off the ground . 

  The diminishing role of the unions , disillusionment among workers , and falling membership due to unemployment had put many of them in considerable financial difficulties . 

  Although the idea was superficially attractive , money was too tight . 

  Ben Lowe had studied the McCarthy report carefully and had answers for a lot of the scepticism , even though the unions' enthusiasm had been blunted . 

  And Walsh , zooming about , was tirelessly energetic and ruthless in his determination . 

  Mike Power and Clive Thornton pointed him in the right direction and sent him in like a terrier down a rabbit hole . 

  He and Hayling emerged with 11,000 from Manchester City Council , 7,000 from the TGWU , 6,000 from SOGAT and a total of 10,650 from six others -- National Union of Public Employees ( NUPE ) , 3,500 ; National Communications Union ( NCU ) , 2,000 ; National Union of Journalists ( NUJ ) , 2,000 ; National Association of Local Government Officers ( NALGO ) , 2,000 ; Association of Cinematograph , Television and Allied Technicians ( ACTT ) , 650 ; and the tiny TGWU-dominated Bakers' Union , 500 . 

  The people who wrote the original GLC-funded pre-feasibility study -- Chris Walsh , Ben Lowe , Mike Power , Liz Cooper and Kit Sadgrove -- met in a flat near Kings Cross and formed themselves , with the addition of five others , all friends , into the Founders' Trust . 

  The Founders put up the required 5,000 . making a total of 39,650 -- enough to match GLEB and trigger the promised grant . 

  But while Walsh and Hayling were raising the money , relations with Thornton were becoming increasingly strained . 

  He began thumping the table and insisting the paper install experienced management . 

  The comrades were horrified . 

  One of the key elements of the paper had always been that it should be run on consensus lines , with broad agreement among the group , often expressed by a vote before any decision was taken . 

  The trouble with " meetings management " is that the viewpoint adopted is that of the people who turn up . 

  If you miss a meeting , or a crucial decision within one , it is very difficult to have anything reversed afterwards , as it has then been approved by the consensus and therefore stands . 

  Decision-making and prioritizing therefore fall more and more to the kind of people whose forte is attending meetings and getting the support of those present . 

  It is management by attrition . 

  But the decision to use it was deliberate . 

  NoS people were not just inexperienced in business , but were opposed to its methods , and consciously trying to do things in a different way to prove the rottenness of the capitalist system . 

  Thornton , on the other hand , understood a lot about the caring side of capitalism , but was firmly wedded to the way it operated . 

  He grew more and more dismayed at this well-meaning amateurism , which he could not see working in practice . 

  The two sides might have parted company there and then had it not been for the GLEB's condition that someone with newspaper business experience should be on the executive . 

  Thornton agreed to stay , but insisted that his name be kept secret . 

  As he was only a member of the executive , with the same status as everybody else , they agreed , but then promptly let him down . 

  James Curran , the left-wing media intellectual who had been advising on market research , leaked his involvement to Tribune , the established semi-official paper of the traditional Labour left . 

  Thornton exploded , and successfully demanded that Curran be booted out . 

  RSGB 

  The leaked news that a figure as credible as Thornton was involved put NoS on the public stage . 

  Thornton then insisted that although his name was known it was not to be used for fund-raising . 

  He would remain on the sidelines , and do some more work if and when they were ready to launch the paper . 

  He also advised them again to get a high-profile chairman and a well-known editor . 

  Pilger had already been suggested , but Thornton was unimpressed after coming across him in his Daily Mirror days . 

  He was more interested in offering the post to John Lloyd , one of the most respected journalists on the Financial Times . 

  With Thornton dropping into the background and the money coming in , the comrades progressed to the next stage , the dummy edition . 

  It was a marathon process . 

  The paper was first scheduled to be printed in June , but in the end did not go on the presses until four months later in mid-October . 

  It was preceded by the involvement of hundreds of people in discussion groups devoted to different sections -- home news , features , music , the arts , international and foreign news and sport . 

  At great length , and with considerable idealistic heart-searching , they worked through the various problems and anomalies of the paper in comparison with its rival newspapers . 

  The discussion groups were relatively open , and many people came along as friends of friends . 

  Some were journalists , others political activists , and many were interested in working on the paper for wages once it got going . 

  One of the attractions of NoS was that , in breaking away from the Fleet Street mould , it was also looking for a different sort of employee . 

  A major part of the paper's thinking was that it could employ people who would have been good journalists if they had pursued journalism as a conventional career . 

  They were therefore unrecognized , as they knew only too well , and were attracted by the idea of the possibility of a job . 

  Some were qualified , others wanted to learn . 

  Most of the group members were quite young , Right-On , middle-class , intellectual , and had their own particular obsession which they wanted to see in the paper . 

  There was a high attendance by women , who formed a major part of the thinking . 

  A count at one meeting revealed that all twenty-seven people present were Guardian readers , and it was obvious that many of them knew little about popular papers . 

  This persuaded one faction , representing experienced newspaper people such as John Palmer , to try to push the paper back upmarket . 

  Palmer , seconded by GLEB to work with NoS , felt many people were naively attracted to the pops because they thought they were easier to do . 

  Fleet Street , which has been spending millions for years trying get the formula right , holds the opposite point of view . 

  Working on a quality paper , where journalists have more room for the finer points and a more informed audience , is considered to be much less demanding . 

  Although these new contributors were welcomed , the central organization of News on Sunday remained secretive and close-knit . 

  Instead of being directly involved , radical supporters were diverted into the groups where their thoughts could be sifted and selected at will . 

  Walsh , ever eager to stick his finger in someone else's pie , gravitated towards the foreign affairs discussion group . 

  The agonized hand-wringing about internationalism and the finer points of world politics were thrust aside . 

  Instead Walsh put in simplistic suggestions with blockheadedly dramatic headlines like : " South Africa -- Is it going to blow ? " 

  It was exactly what Palmer feared . 

  Ultimately , though , which way the paper was going to go was decided by market research , a new obsession and an antiseptic surrogate for contact with real tabloid readers . 

  " Concept research " , followed by an omnibus quantitative survey , produced a brief for the dummy which came out in favour of the more " downmarket " left-wing Mail on Sunday , rather than the " Sunday Guardian " . 

  Walsh was pleased . 

  For him this was a move in the right direction , though not far enough . 

  The brief suggested a paper with sixty-four pages , " strong on photographs , highly readable and written to be taken seriously " . 

  But the brief also instructed that it was to be " a lively , humorous paper that covered all aspects of life and not just current affairs . 

  The paper was to be open and frank on political as well as personal issues ; it was to be investigative and campaigning , internationalist , but also accessible , and radical but clearly independent of any political current or party . " 

  Not surprisingly , people in market-research panels up and down the country had said they would be delighted to buy a paper like that . 

  Now all the comrades had to do was produce it . 

  The job of pouring vintage Right-On journalism into mid-market " quality-tabloid " bottles fell to Hayling . 

  He was now the member of the newly formed executive committee with special responsibility for both structuring the company and liaising with discussion groups and with adviser John Pilger . 

  After a series of delays , more discussion groups and a conference in Manchester , work started on the actual dummy . 

  It was put together at the Camden New Technology Centre , which was loaned by the council , and administered from News on Sunday's recently occupied headquarters in Caxton House near Waterloo station , the London offices of the print union , SOGAT . 

  The dummy took three weeks' work by a team of volunteers , mostly part-time and helping when they could . 

  The operation was overseen by Pilger , who put in an occasional appearance in person with suggestions for improvement . 

  Nobody knows exactly how many people were responsible for input , but by the time the dummy was finished more than two hundred had played a part one way or another . 

  Some of the work went smoothly , but a lot was chaotic , with much confusion and many meetings to dole out coverage in accordance with the relative worthiness of various campaigns . 

  Brian Whitaker , a former editor of the Sunday Times " Insight " team who was responsible for much of the last-minute layout , found himself interrupted by the constant political hubbub . 

  At one point a furious gay activists delegation turned up . 

  It had heard that the paper was planning to include an item on AIDS and demanded to be consulted . 

  A cardinal error had obviously been made , as the paper had made huge efforts beforehand to consult pressure groups about tackling their subject in an approved fashion . 

  Naturally the activists got their meeting at once . 

  Whitaker thought this was all wonderful stuff and great fun , but at one stage when his patience was wearing thin he was heard to exclaim : " This is worse than working for Murdoch ! " 

  News on Sunday , when it eventually emerged , was pronounced a fair effort by the rest of the industry . 

  It had its sixty-four pages , some in smudgy Today -style colour , some in glossy heat-set colour , and most in good old black and white . 

  The front-page story was about a waste pipe dribbling low-grade radioactive waste into the Thames , which , by Fleet Street standards , was not a great story . 

  Clive Thornton contributed a personal finance column . 

  The paper was an extraordinary jumble . 

  So many people had to be pleased or mollified , and it was trying to do so many things at once , that the pages were hopelessly crammed with bitty stories . 

  But it was particularly strong on international news , and contained a good consistent political line which pleased most of the people involved . 

  The design , however , was almost universally condemned within the project . 

  At a glance , the paper resembled a specialist publication like Motorcycle News , with elements of Socialist Worker , New Musical Express and the Mail on Sunday stirred in . 

  The new obsession with trendy design was indulged in by scattering diamond-shaped symbols around the pages . 

  The paper was immediately put out for market research by RSGB -- Research Surveys of Great Britain Ltd , one of Britain's largest and most respected market-research companies . 

  The company , which is a wholly owned subsidiary of AGB Research , had been chosen by Ben Lowe partly because it had done market research for other papers , including an abortive workers' co-operative , the Scottish Daily News . 

  ( It was later to do work for the Independent . ) 

  It was also felt that it was a company which nobody could attack on the grounds of political bias in favour of the project -- if anything , thought Walsh , the other way round , after he had seen a portrait of Margaret Thatcher prominently displayed in its Ealing headquarters . 

  After two weeks RSGB's thick brown-covered report thumped on to Lowe's desk . 

  It contained nearly a hundred pages , densely covered with rows of figures -- the results of interviews with 1,072 people from Land's End to John O'Groats . 

  Lowe liked crunching numbers anyway , but as his figures skittered across the rubbery keys of the calculator , he began to gasp with amazement . 

  After a desultory fifteen minutes looking through News on Sunday , 5.6 per cent of interviewees had said they were " certain to buy " a paper like Hayling's dummy . 

  In a national Sunday paper market of around 20 million , this amounted to 1.1 million " certain' sales every week . 

  Add in 9.8 per cent who said they were " very likely to buy " , and you had three million customers . 

  When the shock had worn off , Ben Lowe and Henry Stewart -- recently drafted on to the executive committee from the Newcastle regional group -- started examining the figures in detail . 

  Their findings were summed up in the feasibility study published in February 1986 , which predicted a minimum weekly sale of 800,000 and a maximum of 1.5 million . 

  There were a number of warnings from RSGB which were included , and which were later to be added into the company prospectus . 

  " Newspaper sale prediction is open to wide margins of error , as are any sale predictions ... primarily because the quality of the product will change from week to week depending on the available content , the number of editorial pages and so on . " 

  There were other factors to be taken into account -- the effect of the pre-launch television advertising campaign , the launch of new opposition titles , and the " variability of the product from the impression given by the dummy " . 

  Lowe and Stewart concluded that all these factors were " likely to increase sales " . 

  They thought the pre-launch promotional campaign would easily counter any moves by the opposition . 

  The other new launches planned were Sunday Today and Sunday Sport -- neither aimed at the same sort of readers . 

  Most important , the real paper , as opposed to the dummy , would be " produced with professional staff , an extensive newsgathering network and extensive resources , and it therefore seems certain that it will be more impressive than the dummy issue " , they grandly announced . 

  The most extraordinary factor was RSGB's advice that they should go ahead and publish -- the opposite to what the company had told the Scottish Daily News . 

  And the advice was on the back of the most comprehensive research ever carried out for a new paper . 

  Though Lowe tried to hang on to the original concept , RSGB's figures finally killed off the " Sunday Guardian " approach . 

  The paper had now taken a major turning . 

  The market gap which Lowe had guessed was there was bigger than he had expected . 

  Walsh was ecstatic : now the paper was looking far beyond the Right-On supporters' group and being told what he had always wanted to believe -- there was a large group of solid working-class people fed up with the frivolity in the existing tabloids . 

  Added to the Right-On readers , they effectively expanded the core group and provided a viable number of buyers . 

  The readership identified by RSGB broke down equally between men and women . 

  Most -- 65 per cent -- were working-class in socioeconomic groups C2 , D and E. The rest were white-collar , middle-class and upper-class from groups A , B and C1 . 

  The readers were younger than average , with 45 per cent under thirty-five , compared with 37 per cent in the population as a whole , and the paper was confirmed as northern , with 67 per cent of its potential readers beyond the Watford Gap . 

  It seemed that NoS was going to be the first to tap the huge reservoir of people who had given up on the papers altogether . 

  An impressive 17 per cent of the potential readers were not buying a Sunday paper at the moment . 

  Of the ones who were , half would come across from the News of the World , Sunday Mirror and People . 

  More than a third of sales would be to Labour voters , another third to Alliance or Tory ( 12 per cent ) , and the rest to people who could not say which party they supported . 

  As an aside the research revealed that just under half of the women questioned did not support the women's liberation movement . 

  To this day RSGB stand behind their research . 

  The fact that it was proved to be an overestimate is blamed on various horrors which took place on the paper's route to market . 

  But at the same time , the fact has supported those who have a low opinion of market research in estimating " self-image " matters such as which paper people will buy . 

  Now , after various newspaper disasters , it is being recognized that allegiance to a particular paper , whatever others may think of it , is not something people change lightly . 

  Even when the study appeared , there was a great deal of scepticism within NoS , but the attitude was that they had consulted the experts and got the evidence . 

  If this was the reply , they were prepared to go with it . 

  The next step was to turn the feasibility study into a detailed business plan which would be presented in a share prospectus aimed at attracting the target 6.5 million now estimated to be needed to launch a paper selling between 800,000 and 1.1 million copies . 

  The key to this was finding a Chairman . 

  And although Thornton seemed the obvious choice to the outside world , relationships with him had reached a new low in October 1985 . 

  Immediately after the dummy was produced , Thornton found that money had been raised in his home city of Newcastle by using his name without permission . 

  He was furious . 

  He had already noted , with some concern , that money raised was immediately " dissipated " into a range of fringe activities . 

  But this was too much ; he picked up the phone and left his resignation on the answering machine at Caxton House . 

  The next morning Tom Picton , a former lecturer at the Royal College of Art who had worked as picture editor on the dummy edition , played back the tinny message . 

  " This is Clive Thornton . 

  I resign here and now . " 

  Thornton was eventually smoothed down and persuaded to stay on condition that the paper find a Chairman at once -- a reputable businessman whose name could be used instead of his . 

  Finding someone was a question of asking round in likely circles . 

  Matthew Evans , head of publishers Faber and Faber , was the first to get the call . 

  Hayling reported to the unenthusiastic executive committee that he was " favourably disposed " , but nothing came of it . 

  Sir Denis Foreman , of Granada Television , excited a little more interest . 

  He told Hayling that he was keen to help , but could do nothing until he retired in April , more than six months away . 

  The IBA rules prevent chairmen of television companies having substantial national newspaper interests . 

  But he would be happy to be " Godfather " to the project . 

  Christmas came and went , and it was three months since Thornton's answering-machine ultimatum . 

  Since nobody else had been found , Hayling offered Thornton the Chairmanship , but the executive attached two humiliating conditions . 

  First he was to endorse publicly the NoS Equal Opportunities approach , and second he was to agree to allow negotiations with the unions to " run their course " quietly . 

  As Hayling , Walsh , Lowe and the others must have known , Thornton could not accept either condition . 

  He was on record as saying that he regarded the agonizing over Equal Opportunities on a paper which did not even exist as -- at best -- a red herring . 

  And he felt even more strongly about the union issue . 

  He had told them a year ago that one of the main reasons he was interested in the paper was his conviction that the " new realism " of print unions made it financially possible to seize the " window of opportunity " . 

  Thornton was not interested . 

  NoS had mucked him about for more than a year . 

  He had attended endless meetings which they accused him of dominating . 

  If he did not turn up they moaned at him later for not being there , and they had used his name for fund-raising without permission . 

  All he had intended to do was bridge the gap until they got a Chairman , or " Chair " as he was supposed to call it . 

  With Thornton's final refusal the comrades could not fudge the Chair issue any longer . 

  They tried Walter Runciman of the Child Poverty Action Group and Peter Hughes of Logica , the computer company . 

  Runciman was not interested and Hughes told them he was busy turning round his company , which had temporarily bombed -- an ideal qualification in retrospect . 

  As they culled Who's Who there was a debate on the executive about the " Old Lord approach " -- finding someone who had been a financial force in the past , and would prove the paper was commercially sober . 

  But at the same time , through being virtually geriatric as they saw it , the Lord could be expected to stay in his castle and not spoil the fun . 

  Lord Lovell-Davis , Lord Kearton ( Labour financier and former head of the National Enterprise Board ) , Lord Wedderburn ( Professor at the London School of Economics ) and Joel Barnett ( merchant banker and former Labour Treasury Minister ) were put in the frame and sounded out . 

  But , employing the commercial sobriety for which they were being approached , they all refused . 

  Then Hayling struck gold . 

  A call to Nicholas Horsley , the Chairman of the Hull-based food-supply giant , Northern Foods , led to a meeting at Glendor House , Clarges Street , the company's plush Mayfair duplex flat off Curzon Street . 

  Hayling lavished the famous charm in unprecedented quantities , making an immediate and long-lasting impression on the fifty-two-year-old Horsley . 

  It did not take long to get things sorted out . 

  At Northern Foods Horsley's brother-in-law , Chris Haskins , was taking a bigger and bigger part in the running of the company , leaving Horsley with more time , and he was delighted to have a chance to help in a project which instantly appealed to his idealistic nature . 

  He accepted at once and was almost ready to start tomorrow . 

  He promised , as his first task , to sort out Thornton . 

  All that remained was to get his appointment approved by the comrades . 

  The NoS executive reacted to the Horsley option with characteristic lack of grace . 

  Ben Lowe was dispatched to comb the radical food supplier's background for things to complain about . 

  The verdict was that Horsley had about as clean a bill of health as it was possible for a real , live capitalist to have . 

  Northern Foods was even tussling with one of its customers -- the 100 per cent un-Right-On McDonalds hamburger chain -- over its activities in South Africa . 

  This was just the sort of attitude the paper wanted -- in another context it would have been a good news story . 

  And Horsley had given money to miners' families during the 1984-5 strike . 

  Horsley passed the test and went off to see Thornton , who was still simmering and had nothing but dire warnings for him . 

  " They're driving me mad , " he fumed . 

  He had been let down several times , they had done all sorts of things without asking him , and sometimes he only found out what they'd been up to when the papers rang for comment . 

  " They've no idea . 

  And it will be you who'll be in the public gaze as the figurehead . 

  You will get the reporters , the TV , the media all intruding into your private life asking you to explain what's going on . 

  It's not worth it , " he stressed . 

  But to Thornton's surprise , Horsley assured him that NoS's navety was its greatest asset . 

  The stories of his own radical youth flowed out . 

  " You know , they remind me of myself thirty years ago when I was a student activist at Oxford , " enthused Horsley . 

  Hayling's invitation had brought it all back . 

  When Horsley had left university in the mid-1950s , with a third-class degree in philosophy , politics and economics , he had planned to conquer the world as a footloose roving reporter in the mould of his great hero , the foreign correspondent James Cameron . 

  He set off with rucksack and typewriter on a round-the-world trip , but only got as far as New Orleans , where , ever the hopeless romantic , he fell in love with a girl he met on a park bench . 

  Before the first blockbuster clattered from his typewriter he was back in Hull , settled down with his new wife , and started in middle management in the family business , then called Northern Dairies . 

  Thornton was unimpressed . 

  While Horsley had been cavorting about at Oxford , he had been on the first rung of an entirely different social ladder , as a solicitor's clerk . 

  Horsley did not think much of Thornton either , and later complained ( as did others ) that he talked mostly about himself . 

  But to seal the deal he offered Thornton a place on the board of the nascent company , Jeboda , which was to be News on Sunday until flotation . 

  Thornton accepted , agreeing to stay around and possibly play a larger role again if things looked up . 

  But he gave a final warning to Horsley . 

  He was going to find he had an enormously difficult job on his hands . 

  The people in NoS had to be made to realize that if they were going after big money , professional management had to come in . 

  And that meant them moving over . 

  Thornton saw no sign that they were prepared to do so . 

  Horsley just smiled , his large relaxed frame and confident bonhomie contrasting sharply with the abrupt style of the little self-made Geordie . 

  He looked down at Thornton and informed him of the new management attitude . 

  His hero , James Cameron , would have approved . 

  " They've got a dream , Clive . 

  A dream . 

  And we've got to help them make it come true . " 

  Serious money 

  Moving up north 

  With Clive Thornton out of the way , the media spotlight began to warm up on Nick Horsley . 

  And he began to sweat . 

  At this stage the media hounds were sniffing News on Sunday for signs of Loony or Hard Left activity . 

  It was partly for a story , and partly to size the paper up as competition or business . 

  Files on the paper were being opened in cuttings libraries and ( behind the scenes ) on executive computers . 

  Newcomers -- especially such crucial ones as the Chairman -- were being inspected carefully as the jigsaw of the company began to fall into place . 

  But Horsley's reasons for joining the paper were entirely respectable . 

  He was a pacifist professing the admirable , old-fashioned virtues of his Quaker upbringing . 

  Horsley's CND activities went back to his days at Oxford , when the time he spent on demonstrations was one of the reasons for his third-class degree . 

  He remained an active supporter of CND , boasted that his daughter had been conceived on an Aldermaston march , and had once horrified Margaret Thatcher by wearing his CND badge when he met her at a gathering of northern business people . 

  He even had a CND sticker in the back window of his car , a Jaguar XJ4.2 -- and he claimed that no other Jaguar in the country displayed one . 

  Campaign , the advertising industry trade paper , noted that he had happily accepted the deletion of the suffix " man " from his title of Chairman of News on Sunday Publishing plc . 

  The article made a weak joke about his CND beret . 

  There was no questioning the fact that Horsley was an extremely successful businessman , even if his clothes sometimes looked more like Country Life . 

  His big frame , slightly unkempt , thinning blond hair and florid appearance smacked of outdoor activity and a " hearty " attitude . 

  He had been a keen sportsman in his youth , and now followed cricket avidly . 

  And he was well known in the City , where there was still respect for a solid Yorkshire businessman . 

  Northern Foods was one of the largest and most successful companies in the country , with a steady record of expansion which was beginning to attract foreign investment . 

  At the same time , the company's interests had spread all over the world , far beyond the milk-round set up by his father . 

  The company had been well placed to take advantage of the 1960s consumer boom , and was already prospering by the time Horsley joined the Board in 1963 , at the age of twenty-nine . 

  He became Chairman seven years later ; under his chairmanship profits rose from 1 million to 60 million , making him by far the most successful businessman in the East Riding . 

  A particular coup for the firm was the contract to supply the rapidly expanding Marks and Spencer chain . 

  But Horsley had not sacrificed his humanitarian principles whilst presiding over such speedy business growth . 

  Northern Foods had always had a good name locally , and had earned respect for its relations with its workers . 

  Horsley personally insisted the company practise Equal Opportunities , and have fully unionized factories where managers and employees addressed each other on Christian-name terms . 

  In some ways , though , Nick -- as he insisted people call him -- lived in the shadow of his father Alec , a renowned pacifist who had set up a Chair of Peace Studies at Bradford University on the sensible grounds that everywhere else seemed to study war . 

  It was through this initiative that Nick finally got to meet his great hero , James Cameron , and after the collapse of his first marriage , he married Cameron's step-daughter , Sabeita . 

  When she left him in 1983 he was devastated . 

  But after that he met up again with Olwen , a childhood friend . 

  The two of them had often met socially in the old days , with their respective partners , at evenings in the Green Dragon , the local pub in the village of Welton , ten miles from Hull , where Horsley lived in a magnificent stone house which , he always stressed , did not have a drive . 

  Olwen had had her troubles as well . 

  Her marriage had broken up , and she had gone to live with a man who was starting an art gallery in the Lake District . 

  The relationship did not work out , and early one Sunday morning she rang Horsley pleading for help . 

  He told her to drive to him immediately , and when she arrived treated her to a breakfast of kippers and Chablis . 

  They had stayed together ever since , and Nick referred to her as his " partner " . 

  Olwen was not at all sure about the NoS offer . 

  She thought it would be a big mistake for Nick to devote two or three days a week to the newspaper at the expense of the family business . 

  And she was worried about his health . 

  Horsley was being slowly crippled by a rare type of paralysis spreading from his ankle , which meant that he now had to walk with a stick , and which it was feared would eventually put him in a wheelchair . 

  Frequent travel made his leg swell up , and caused him a considerable amount of discomfort . 

  Olwen did not know at that time that the commitment was soon to become twenty-four hours a day , seven days a week . 

  At one point she told Nick that if Hayling -- whom she referred to as " that nice-looking young man with the curly hair " -- came round again she would refuse to let him in . 

  But she did , and was another won over by the famous charm . 

  Horsley cheerfully admitted when he took up the post of Chair that he knew nothing about newspapers . 

  He would rely instead on his successful general business experience to pull him through . 

  His language was full of nautical metaphors . 

  The Board was the bridge ; he was going to keep his hand on the wheel . 

  This was a perfect frame of mind for chairing Northern Foods , a great supertanker of a business forging steadily ahead through the profitable waters of supermarket supply . 

  But NoS was more like a racing power-boat , and Horsley soon found himself in the position of a water-skier rather than a captain . 

  Instead of being at the controls , he was desperately clinging on while the engines , at full throttle , thrust the boat violently from side to side as a host of faction fighters wrestled to grab the wheel -- or in most cases to avoid touching it . 

  Shrewd observers , such as Paul Johnson of the Spectator , pointed out that there was a world of difference between running a food-supply business -- however large and successful -- and a newspaper . 

  The former was a relatively stable affair . 

  Newspapers , even ones unencumbered by the exceptional problems NoS was creating for itself , need quick decisions and highly interventionist managers who know the business inside out . 

  But Horsley was popular with the Founders on a personal level . 

  His politics did not cause any problems . 

  He was a self-confessed old-fashioned Liberal , who believed in people being nicer to each other , and he had a warm and generous manner to which they responded . 

  Hayling got huge enjoyment from introducing the two sides , and he and others were beside themselves at the incongruity of the meeting . 

  Their attitude was part of an exaggerated respect for the English class system , and they did not seem to realize that an open-minded person like Horsley could easily have had the same sort of meeting at , for example , a CND conference . 

  Horsley , as a Yorkshireman , was naturally a fan of the north , and hoped that News on Sunday , as part of its political stance , would help halt the growing north-south divide . 

  The paper had originally intended to base itself in London , where large-scale funding from GLEB and the GLC seemed certain under the banner of creating jobs . 

  But now that the GLC was about to be abolished and GLEB was in trouble , the paper , with Horsley's enthusiastic support , decided to move to Manchester . 

  Horsley and Hayling were in disagreement about the Manchester move . 

  But the two men had quickly developed a peculiarly close and mutually protective relationship , and could agree to differ without falling out . 

  It was said that Horsley treated Hayling as the brilliant but wayward son he always wanted , but never had . 

  He could criticize " Alan " , but nobody else was allowed to . 

  Others said that Horsley saw in Hayling the image of what he had always wanted to be -- idealistic , full of derring-do , glamorous , and free from the tedious baggage of conventional business life . 

  The NoS pro-Manchester lobby had a strong moral argument which appealed to both Horsley and the Founders . 

  The paper would be whisked out of the cynical ghetto of Fleet Street , and away from distorted , degenerate London priorities -- back to basics and closer to " the people " . 

  Supporters of this argument seemed to believe that the paper could defy the laws of journalistic and financial gravity . 

  All the nationals except the Daily Star , which had been specifically based there by its owners to soak up the spare capacity left by their other declining title , the Daily Express , had either closed down , moved to London or drastically reduced their Manchester operations . 

  The Guardian left at the end of the 1950s , and even the Star was shortly to move to the Smoke . 

  The anti-London lobby , however , was well organized and had financial arguments to back its case . 

  There was the possibility of large-scale investment from Manchester and other northern councils hoping to stem the tide and keep a vestige of the newspaper industry in the city . 

  EEC training grants would also be available . 

  To bolster the argument , Kerry Marcus , a radio journalist from Manchester , was hired on a 6,000 grant from Manchester City Council to produce a convincing financial case . 

  Marcus calculated that by taking into account property costs -- estimated at a third of those in London -- and salaries on average 2,000 lower , the paper should save 658,000 a year by being based in Manchester . 

  It could also get 140,000 in grants and investment from the council and the local equivalent of GLEB if it moved north . 

  By this time many of the London borough councils , such as Islington , Brent and Southwark , were confidently expected to invest , regardless of where the paper was based . 

  There was hope that locating the paper in the north would swing other , non-London councils behind it . 

  As much as 750,000 extra in investment from Manchester and other northern councils was estimated to be available if the paper moved . 

  And , to top the argument , market research indicated greater reader-loyalty amongst NoS's target audience for a northern-based paper -- indicating an extra 1 million a year in sales and advertising revenue . 

  Added together , the anti-London lobby said , there was around 2.5 million to be gained by moving to Manchester . 

  But in the end , like most decisions on NoS , the Manchester move was " positively negative " . 

  It was not so much pro-Manchester as anti-London . 

  As the paper was to be printed on contract presses with pages faxed across electronically , its editorial offices could in theory be based anywhere . 

  But the plan had another side to it -- it was a vital factor in the faction fighting which was beginning to engulf the paper . 

  For the comrades it was a back-handed way of ensuring that the increasingly suspect and disliked Pilger would be ruled out as editor . 

  And it would cut his ally Hayling down to size . 

  Both men had fought a long and isolated battle against the move from London . 

  Globe-trotting Pilger regarded even London as provincial ; Manchester was beyond the pale . 

  He described the city as " an interesting train ride away from all the talent and all the good stories . " 

  He might visit from time to time should a story miserable enough to write about crop up , but there was no way he was going to edit the paper from there . 

  After all , Pilger was a citizen of the world . 

  He virtually commuted between London and Sydney , his Australian birthplace , where he would stay for months at a time with his parents , making award-winning films , before returning to London in his safari suit , sun-bleached and fit . 

  He saw himself , with some justice , as towering above the rest of the NoS people . 

  He admired some of them as determined but ordinary folk . 

  Others , like Hayling , obviously had talent , but none of them had even a fraction of the experience or ability which had twice earned him the Journalist of the Year award for his coverage of Vietnam and Cambodia . 

  Though Pilger was a committed left-winger , he was lacking the finer points of the new feminist-influenced Right-On etiquette . 

  The maverick and often exasperating individualism which had served him well in battles against conservative-minded executives at the Mirror became a major liability at NoS , where the premium was on conformity to group objectives . 

  Like all outsiders , he was automatically a focus for suspicion , and his casual dismissal of the Manchester plan had gained him enemies . 

  Hayling , who was now working closely with Pilger , sensed the Manchester decision had been made in advance by the Founders , and assembled a team of journalists to explain what was wrong with it . 

  He wanted to use Pilger as his main gun , but the globetrotter had disappeared abroad again . 

  As a substitute Brian Whitaker , the second most experienced journalist continuously involved with NoS , was drafted to write a journalist's case for the paper remaining in London . 

  Whitaker's report explained how newspapers worked . 

  Just because the paper was in Manchester would not even mean that it would be easier to report on the north . 

  All the lines of communication were routed through London . 

  London had the City , the Government and all its departments , the headquarters of all the major companies and pressure groups , all the people in the know -- in short , as Pilger had said , all the stories . 

  And the crucial support elements , such as press-cuttings and picture libraries , were in the capital . 

  Even the Founders recognized that a London presence could not be abandoned altogether , so by choosing a northern HQ the paper would turn itself into a two-site operation . 

  This would throw up a host of attendant problems . 

  But the Founders and their political allies were not interested in these facts , which , with their ignorance of newspapers , did not mean much to them . 

  They decided that Pilger , Hayling and the journalists simply could not be bothered to make the move . 

  Hayling had let them know that the move would complicate his personal life . 

  He was a pro-feminist " new man " , and therefore saw himself as required to do his fair share of the housework and of looking after his young daughter at home in Shepherd's Bush . 

  But the Founders' vote for Manchester was also supported by Walsh , who was excited by the possibilities of fund-raising from the northern councils . 

  The decision was not unanimous , but it was clear-cut . 

  Hayling recognized at the time how the project had been damaged . 

  It was only later that he described the mistake as " terminal " , but he knew originally that it was serious . 

  By the time the paper was launched a year later , it was clear that he was right . 

  The economic advantages evaporated , and large-scale investment by Greater Manchester Council's pension fund never materialized , although other northern councils did invest . 

  The move was a major handicap in recruiting journalists -- who , after all the fuss , were mostly hired from the south , and not from the local redundant talent which was said to have been available . 

  The costs and confusions inflicted by the twin-site operation were huge . 

  News on Sunday ended up with the worst of both worlds -- a paper with metropolitan Right-On concerns , produced in a city that had fallen off the edge of the Right-On world . 

  Hayling's authority as chief executive was severely dented by the decision , and his defeat contributed to the creating of an unmanageable company where authority was beginning to dissolve into competing committees and rival cabals . 

  He considered resigning , for the first and not the last time , but failed to do so . 

  And the argument over Manchester polarized the two ends of the company . 

  The Founders and the closely allied management team , recently formed from the old executive committee and resolved to work by consensus , began to close ranks against Hayling and the intruding alien business world which he came to represent . 

  The main voice for the growing suspicions was Liz Cooper , a member both of the management team and the Founders' Trust . 

  As a staunch feminist , she grew alarmed as all the positions of power were taken by men . 

  It seemed that the men were welshing on the Equal Opportunities policy so as to make the paper more attractive to investors . 

  And the feeling grew that the women had been outpersonoeuvred . 

  Instead of being at the top , they were being concentrated in middle management , where all the hard detailed work had to be done . 

  Walsh , lecturing the others on how they must junk " traditional left-wing fund-raising methods " , had the most important job of the moment as fund-raising co-ordinator . 

  He was now presenting himself as a cynical hard-nosed East End wheeler-dealer . 

  He had recruited John Hoyland , the recently redundant editor of the GLC freesheet Jobs for a Change , as his assistant and general factotum . 

  Hoyland saw his job as trying to impose some order on his boss's whirlwind operating methods , which had caused such irritation amongst the others that there had been demands for his dismissal . 

  Hayling , now describing himself in Trotskyite jargon as a " commercial rightist " , and wearing a three-piece suit to prove it , seemed determined to become a City gent . 

  He was disappearing regularly into the bowels of the City to meet various moneypersons , all of whom were assumed to be faintly threatening male chauvinists . 

  And he had formed an exclusive and close personal relationship , which went beyond mere business , with another powerful man , Nick Horsley . 

  Horsley , in turn , was followed around and virtually nursed , as the women saw it , by the embarrassingly doting and un-feminist Olwen , whose old-fashioned attitude towards her man sickened them . 

  Hayling and Horsley were obviously lining up yet another man , Pilger , to control what the paper would say with its editorial content . 

  Without consultation , Hayling had invited Pilger to move up from being a mere adviser to the new post of editorial director . 

  The Horsley-Hayling-Pilger axis , with Walsh spinning round it in an erratic orbit , symbolized the male domination of the project . 

  The feminists thought the whole structure was rotten , but they had taken a particular dislike to Pilger . 

  He embodied everything that was wrong about men . 

  He was arrogant , powerful , patronizing , self-assured , and would sweep into rooms and dominate space and conversation . 

  For Liz Cooper it was somehow summed up by his big feet , a typical male defect , which she would complain about whenever possible . 

  On top of this , there were plenty of people in NoS who were opposed to the idea of having an editor at all . 

  Supporters had been split into regional groups throughout the country , and John and Joan Bohanna's Merseyside Regional Group directly confronted Pilger , telling him that " ultimate NoS editorial control rests not with the editor , or the Board of Directors , but the Founders " , and the editor would have to do their bidding at all times . 

  There were only four things that the editor could do without consulting the Founders . 

  He could work out the house-style ; take legal responsibility for libel ; make sure nothing went in the paper which was against the editorial Charter when the Founders were not looking ; and he could put " scoops " in the paper should the reporters come across some . 

  The traditional notion of an editor , hired to get on with it , was out . 

  This arrangement represented " the same top-down white patriarchal model of leadership that surrounds us in our daily life in capitalist society and most left-wing organizations in this country . 

  The success of News on Sunday in financial terms does not depend on this outmoded politically sterile model of operation . " 

  Not that the success of News on Sunday in financial terms was very high on the list of priorities . 

  " In the first place we can never forget the main objective in establishing News on Sunday was not to make money , " the Liverpool comrades continued , adding the muddled rider : " It would be lovely to ignore money , but we cannot . " 

  There was little enthusiasm , then , as the paper moved towards the alien financial world of the City to set itself up as a public limited company . 

  Suspicion intensified that a sell-out of its principles was on the cards . 

  Raising the money 

  The manner of the capitalization was that the shares would not be publicly quoted and dealt in like ones on the Stock Exchange , but would be offered to investors who would have faith that the company would grow and their shares would increase with it . 

  A great inducement of " start-ups " or " green-field projects " , where the original investors are in on the ground floor , is that they will make a killing if the company one day goes on to the Stock Exchange , or is gobbled up by a predator in a takeover bid . 

  But to attract the funds needed to capitalize , NoS would have to persuade a merchant bank to sponsor it , which would inevitably lead to confrontation over the Right-On organizational principles on which the project was based . 

  The first merchant bankers approached were Samuel Montagu . 

  They were interested , but their fees were considered to be too high . 

  Instead they recommended Guinness Mahon , part of the giant Guinness Peat group . 

  Hayling went along to meet Anthony Everett , the director who would be handling the issue . 

  Everett , an extremely experienced chartered accountant , was captivated by Hayling and became personally very interested in the paper and the job opportunities it would create . 

  Hayling in turn was delighted to meet a man whose friends described him as a " non-conformist " compared with most City types , and one who had strong views about the way City investment was dominated by political advantage . 

  Everett had difficulty convincing some of his colleagues , but the involvement of Horsley " put it all together " , and he was authorized to take the share issue on . 

  The share offer was to be made through the normal prospectus , summarizing the business plan for the paper and projected profits , endorsed by relevant professional advisers . 

  Guinness Mahon , in conjunction with solicitors Jacques and Lewis , had the responsibility of drawing up the document , a complicated matter strewn with legal pitfalls . 

  Such a process is always lengthy and complicated , as each line has to be verified to ensure no false promises or claims are made . 

  It produced some odd scenes : when NoS wanted to state that the paper was going to be " progressive " and " accessible " , articles from the dummy had to be scrutinized to make sure they proved this was true . 

  There was constant pressure from Everett to make the company more attractive to investors by dumping various Right-On commitments . 

  Hayling relayed the pressure back to the ever more suspicious comrades . 

  There were two specific worries -- the lack of management experience and the extraordinary Golden Share proposal , giving the Founders power over the financial control of the company . 

  But , like Horsley , Everett was immediately infected by the challenge of the project and the admirable enthusiasm which it represented , and he put himself out on a limb to help . 

  It was decided that the company should be capitalized at 6.5 million , to be sold in shares of 1 each . 

  Hayling , Walsh and the others gravely signed undertakings to appear in the prospectus that they would look after the shareholders' money and manage the company in a " responsible and profitable manner " . 

  There was much discussion as to who should and should not appear in the prospectus as the management team . 

  The original plan had been to leave all the top posts open , with a promise to find people as soon as the investors had parted with their cash . 

  Everett pointed out this was ridiculous , and reminded the comrades that management was everything , especially in a risk-capital venture such as this . 

  Many new companies are floated on the reputation of the team alone , and although NoS did not have one which would bring investors flocking , it had at least to state that one existed . 

  Eventually Hayling agreed to appear in the prospectus confirmed as chief executive until the launch . 

  Up until then he had been acting temporarily in the post , awaiting the arrival of a more experienced businessman . 

  Walsh did not appear , but Cooper and Pilger went in as non-executive members of the Board . 

  Hayling was pressuring Gerry Taylor to appear in the prospectus . 

  Taylor , former managing director of the Guardian , was cagey . 

  He had talked to the paper and was agreeing to join , but had not yet committed himself . 

  Anyhow , he had other contractual commitments , so he refused to allow his name to be used . 

  The lack of experienced management was commented upon when the prospectus was issued , but there was an even more serious problem -- the powers given to the Founders' Trust . 

  The Founders had to agree everything to do with the paper , including the appointment of the sponsoring merchant bank . 

  Everett was duly interviewed for suitability in a hall in Shepherd's Bush on a Sunday afternoon . 

  It was a bizarre scene , with the City merchant banker being interrogated about his views on a number of subjects . 

  When asked about his attitude to Equal Opportunities , Everett promptly offered a half-hour lecture on why women should be ordained as priests . 

  The Founders moved on to the next question . 

  The Founders' powers had emerged in the long wrangle with GLEB . 

  Essentially a self-appointed and unaccountable lite , lacking any national-newspaper or big-business experience , they were put in a position of control of both the company and the editorial side of the paper . 

  The objectives were laudable and in some ways romantic . 

  The Founders were to be the guardians of the purity of the paper , protecting it and keeping it in touch with the grass roots which they represented . 

  Membership of the Founders' Trust had changed frequently in the quest to find more women , working-class people and blacks , but at the time the prospectus was issued the original five Founders -- Lowe , Walsh , Cooper , Sadgrove and Power -- had been joined by a mixture of others . 

  Walsh's ex-partner Jo Robinson , ex-Big Flamer Henry Stewart from Newcastle and New Zealand journalist Kerry Brown had become Founders , along with Maxine Johnson , an industrial-relations lecturer who lived in Manchester . 

  The group had been completed by Steve Riley , a T and G shop steward at Fords in Dagenham and two people from Liverpool -- Yussef " Joe " Farrag and Joan Bohanna , shop steward at Glaxo . 

  Bohanna's husband , John , was the secretary to the Trust and its public spokesperson . 

  They were all friends , or friends of friends , of the original group and highly politicized . 

  Hayling had been excluded from becoming a Founder first because of his job policing the project for the GLC grant , and then because he was working for the company . 

  Founders were not allowed to take NoS jobs without giving up their place on the Trust , which determined from the beginning to act as a collective . 

  Hayling nominated Riley and Bohanna , who were cronies from his days as a " workerist " Big Flame activist at Fords . 

  The Founders appeared in the prospectus as holders of a Golden Share which gave them six powers . 

  The most important was the right to prevent any single investor from owning more than 15 per cent of the shares , which effectively gave them the right to veto a takeover bid . 

  The object was to prevent takeover by a rival paper , or even by a consortium of people opposed to NoS and its politics which might try to build up a majority shareholding . 

  Because of the Golden Share , Murdoch and any others would be forced to stand on the sidelines gnashing their teeth as News on Sunday forged ahead , slicing huge swathes off the readership of their titles . 

  The next target was already in sight . 

  Founder Henry Stewart had produced costings for a daily paper financed out of the profits of News on Sunday , which would be protected by a similar fiendish arrangement . 

  The second most important power which came with the ownership of the Golden Share was the right of veto over the hiring and firing of the editor . 

  This was to ensure that he or she would not be pressurized to publish things against their judgement or be got rid of in favour of an outsider who would change the paper's political line . 

  With the final umbrella of the Charter , which theoretically laid down the principles of the paper and what it stood for , the last bricks were put into the edifice . 

  Everett argued that the Founders would have to give up some of their powers if NoS was going to attract any regular City investment . 

  Nobody , he said , would put money into a company controlled by an outside body like theirs , with no financial liability or incentive to make the company profitable . 

  In the first feasibility study for GLEB in November 1984 , NoS had planned to raise 1.5 million from the City , either in the form of venture capital or debenture stock -- a hefty 29 per cent of the launch costs , then estimated at 4.45 million . 

  There was no chance , Everett told them , of raising that sort of money with the Founders' powers . 

  But they did not care , tending to the view that the City was a viper's nest of scheming capitalists , whose sole reason for investing would be to take the paper over . 

  And they had decided that they could keep more control by financing the paper with capital raised from " the movement " . 

  Shares in News on Sunday Publishing plc , registered company No. 1989364 , went on sale at 10am on 9 July 1986 . 

  The offer was of 6 , 500,000 shares at a cost of 1 each . 

  The prospectus offered investors a return of either 18 per cent , 34 per cent or 45 per cent over a three-year period , depending on the accuracy of the sales projections , based on the RSGB figures , with all the appropriate caveats cautiously attached . 

  Because the issue was not underwritten , if any shares remained unsold when the statutory forty-day issue period ended at 5pm on 12 August , the company would fail to capitalize . 

  The whole thing would be over , and all the money raised would have to be sent back . 

  Everett tried a quick tour of " neutral " investors -- the big pension funds , particularly those belonging to the nationalized industries , and the major insurance companies . 

  But he did not waste much time . 

  He knew the projected return for such a risk venture was " at the lower end " , and felt the companies were very wary of anything with a political content . 

  As he expected , he drew a blank , and found the main objection was the Founders' powers . 

  Everett was convinced that part of the lack of enthusiasm was due to the fact the paper would actively support Labour . 

  He knew it was in the interests of the City that the Tories win the next election . 

  But there was nothing he could do . 

  ( There was , however , another side to this coin . 

  The City was beginning to wake up to the fact that the Labour movement , all told , had a great deal of money at its disposal -- especially in the pension funds of Labour-controlled local authorities . 

  Pension-fund investments across the country amounted to billions of pounds , and by helping News on Sunday investors could score many brownie points , and find a possible way in to this exciting and under-exploited source of money . 

  But even that argument failed to raise any investment . ) 

  In any case , most City people put politics to one side and looked at the nascent company as a simple business proposition . 

  Merchant bankers N. M. Rothschild were completely dismissive . 

  Mentioning " optimistic " circulation forecasts and the key problem of inexperienced management , they stated : " There is a very real possibility that the business will run out of cash and that investment returns will be negligible . " 

  They forcefully advised clients not to invest . 

  Phillips and Drew emphasized that there was no finance director to look after investors' money , and added that the return being offered was much too low for such a high-risk project . 

  " The Founders " rights make it difficult for NoS to be taken over , " they warned . 

  " This is a disadvantage in raising the capital because the possibility of profitable acquisition appeals to investors . " 

  It was as Everett had feared -- the Golden Share was being seen as a kind of sterilization pill which would prevent a takeover and a profitable union . 

  But the comrades were prepared for everything the class enemy could throw at them . 

  Walsh , as fund-raising co-ordinator , and Hayling , as " poacher turned gamekeeper " ( as Everett described him ) , had been sounding out potential " movement " investors for months . 

  Reluctantly realizing that major investment from the City was increasingly unlikely , they had been concentrating on the unions and council pension funds . 

  Now they joined in with Everett's strategy of going where the big fish were . 

  The Founders had always thought that they might get some pension-fund money . 

  But it was Hayling and John Hoyland , Chris Walsh's new assistant , who knew exactly how it could be done . 

  Hoyland , like Hayling , had taken an interest in the campaign being run by their GLC employers to " disinvest " -- withdraw investment -- from companies involved in South Africa . 

  In an effort to avoid any financial contact with South Africa , the GLC had devoted considerable attention to its pension fund and the way it was managed . 

  It had been pleasantly surprised to find that , after years when nobody had bothered to find out , political control over the investment decisions was more direct than anyone had realized . 

  The GLC introduced a new vogue for councils to take a far more active role in their investment decisions . 

  Now , just as the GLC had been abolished , NoS was going to step into its shoes and teach other councils how to use their pension funds to back risk ventures , within the limits which were laid down . 

  In many cases NoS was to be their first experiment . 

  The paper homed in on its discovery that councils could use 5 per cent of their pension funds on risk ventures . 

  In one example -- Haringey , which covers an inner-city area of North London including Tottenham -- the 5 per cent limit worked out at 7 million . 

  Larger Labour-controlled county councils had even more money available . 

  Cleveland , in the north-east , had 13 million to invest . 

  Most important of all , much of this risk capital -- adding up to hundreds of millions right across the country -- was at the disposal of the NoS core group's close political allies . 

  All they had to do was hit a tiny fraction of the total available and they were in business . 

  A target of 3.5 million was set for the councils . 

  Hayling and Walsh had already probed the possibility of getting their hands on some of this money , but it was only when Horsley arrived in March 1986 that things began to really move . 

  For the next three months Walsh , Hayling , Horsley , Everett and the ever-present Olwen raced around the country in the black Jaguar . 

  Under Walsh's overall co-ordination Horsley and Hayling , assisted by John Hoyland and Henry Stewart , handled the councils . 

  Walsh , Hayling and a new assistant , Marisa Casares-Roach , looked after the unions . 

  Hayling had introduced Casares-Roach to Walsh after meeting her at a Ford workers' conference in Benidorm where she had been the translator . 

  She was a small , fiery Spanish woman who was experienced in marketing and had once worked for Athletico Madrid football club . 

  Casares-Roach had moved to England in 1968 , and had a multitude of contacts through her trade-union activities , especially in the T and G , where she was a member of one of the national committees . 

  The NoS roadshow was idiosyncratic but effective . 

  Olwen drove , and evolved a schedule of visiting her numerous girlfriends or looking for bargains in the shops whilst the others pitched the local council or union . 

  The bureaucracy of both institutions caused numerous problems , particularly with the councils , where there were endless fixed meetings to attend , return trips , official hands to be shaken and backs to be slapped . 

  As the programme of meetings rolled on , sometimes with many presentations on the same day , Horsley was exhilarated , amazed and excited . 

  Everett , similarly enthusiastic , described it as " being on the stump " . 

  The close-knit team found it exhausting , but tremendous fun -- a bit like a rock tour , with half-hour presentations of the business plan instead of " gigs " . 

  After years of dealing with the likes of dullard and truculent supermarket purchasing managers , Horsley was suddenly meeting all manner of fascinating and powerful people . 

  And he was having the time of his life . 

  There was a Westminster hotel meeting with Neil Kinnock , a fellow CND supporter . 

  Finding that broking in political power was more fun than selling milk , Horsley self-importantly told Kinnock he'd better stick to his socialist principles after being elected Prime Minister , or there'd be trouble from NoS . 

  Kinnock's more realistic reply was : " That's fine , Nick , so long as you help me get to Downing Street first . " 

  Of course the paper would , Horsley assured him . 

  One day in April , Horsley , Walsh and Everett spent the morning in Manchester meeting the Co-op insurance company and asking them for a 750,000 investment , before rushing straight round to the Council Economic Development Committee to pitch for another 500,000 . 

  In the afternoon they sprinted over the hills to the offices of Derbyshire County Council in Matlock . 

  Horsley asked for 500,000 . 

  And Walsh piled on the pressure to get promises of advertising business . 

  On a typical evening , and sometimes in the small hours , it was back to the Caxton House HQ in London for strategy meetings . 

  Whether NoS could be classified as " Loony Left " or not , the majority of its council backers were to be the big names on the Sun hit list . 

  The paper started by zeroing in on the inner London boroughs . 

  Top-priority councils for fund-raising efforts were Lewisham , Haringey and Newham . 

  Islington , Southwark , Camden and Hounslow were thought to be in the bag . 

  The operation was run on a " me too " basis , so Greenwich , for example , was only to be approached after Haringey and Newham had committed themselves . 

  Their investment advisers might try to stop them , or limit the investment if it was being made on social grounds , but the Labour Groups could be relied upon to over-rule the objections . 

  In Islington the financial advisers set a maximum of 50,000 , but the council decided to invest five times that . 

  Hounslow came up with 100,000 after being given a limit of 10,000 . 

  On 12 July Southwark council received a report from its finance director concluding that NoS was high-risk , low-return . 

  He strongly recommended against investment " unless the aim is to support the editorial charter " . 

  The inadequacy of the NoS management , described as " enthusiastic but inexperienced " , was mentioned once again . 

  Nevertheless , Southwark invested 300,000 . 

  There was another problem with some of the firm political allies such as Lambeth , Brent , Haringey and Hackney , who still tended to leave investment decisions to their advisers : NoS had to teach them what to do . 

  At one south London council , which had left the fund in the hands of stockbrokers and been happy to rubber-stamp their annual report , nobody could remember who was in charge . 

  He turned out to be an elderly ex-colonel , who was tracked down to his retirement home in Surrey . 

  At Haringey it needed the direct intervention of council leader Bernie Grant , later to become the first black MP for Tottenham , to change the policy of leaving all investment decisions to the advisers . 

  The outcome was an investment of 250,000 . 

  In Brent , council leader Merle Amory had to organize an emergency meeting of the pension-fund investment panel . 

  Brent came across with another 250,000 . 

  The campaign did well in London , but in the rest of the country the pickings were thin . 

  Derbyshire was a rare , and expected , northern exception , investing 300,000 after the Matlock meeting . 

  ( When Southwark promised 300,000 , matching Derbyshire's investment , the council insisted on putting in another 5,000 to stay the largest single shareholder . ) 

  The West Midlands and Cleveland County came up with 300,000 and 250,000 respectively , and that was all for the rest of England -- a paltry 885,000 compared with the 2,325,000 raised from just twelve London boroughs . 

  A whirlwind Walsh tour of Scotland yielded a meagre 300,000 . 

  Walsh found many of the councils quite backward . 

  Strathclyde , a huge left-Labour-controlled council , had not even set up the required risk-capital fund . 

  Walsh and Everett began to advise them how to do it , but it was too late . 

  Wales only added another 150,000 , but the operation was still an overall success . 

  The target had been 3.5 million , and the total raised from the council pension funds was 3,630,000 . 

  " We have a newspaper ! " 

  Next came the unions . 

  An initial target of 4.7 million , later reduced to 2 million , was set for investments , which could be drawn on the unions' general funds . 

  The target was ambitious , but by no means impossible had the fund-raising campaign been properly organized . 

  It was not . 

  When it came to it , the unions were badly handled and the strategy badly thought out . 

  Seasoned pressure-group activists advised Walsh to combine the presentations to top officials with pressure from the grass-roots . 

  The standard tactics were explained -- alerting the membership in each union , by letter or leaflet , dispatching activists to local branches to pass resolutions supporting the paper and to make sure they got on the agenda of the union's conferences . 

  General Secretaries would then be obliged to satisfy the membership and could be put in a classic squeeze when they were approached at top level , even if supporting NoS was against their better judgement . 

  Walsh sneered at such suggestions as " traditional left " , old-hat and boring . 

  He did not think much of the unions and their so-called democracy , preferring to rely on direct contact with the leaders . 

  In many cases he had left the unions to the last minute and missed the relevant conferences anyway . 

  Instead he was backing what he called the " peer group domino approach " . 

  The first promise of money would be hardest to get , but once it was in the bag the others , not wanting to be left out , would fall in line . 

  Ignorance of the union world was underlined early on by a detailed target list itemizing the amount sought from each union . 

  It included a target of 150,000 from the National Union of Mineworkers , even though it had emerged penniless from the strike in 1985 , with its assets in the hands of the sequestrators . 

  Another 100.000 was put down for the National Union of Journalists , despite its clear and well-known policy of not investing in newspapers because of the inevitable conflict of interest in its role as champion of higher wages for journalists . 

  Another 100,000 was targeted from the National Union of Students , which as a federation of local student unions and associations is barred by law from spending or investing any of its constituent members' money . 

  The Transport and General Workers' Union was the first domino to fall in Walsh's strategy . 

  The T and G is a weathervane union closely connected to the Labour Party leadership . 

  Other unions would wait to see the attitude of its General Secretary , Ron Todd , before making up their minds . 

  Todd , supported by his executive committee , promised 550,000 -- which was 50,000 above target . 

  This was not entirely unexpected , as he had been a firm supporter of the project , and the union had put 7,000 into the earlier feasibility study , but it was still a useful bonus , and provided the sort of result NoS needed to wave around . 

  The real hunt , though , was to find a union less clearly aligned with the labour left . 

  The breakthrough came with the middle-of-the-road National Union of Railwaymen , which promised to come up with their target 150,000 " subject to a positive response from a number of other unions " . 

  The NUR did deliver , and the victory was heavily emphasized in a letter to John Edmonds , leader of the General and Municipal Workers , the largest union led by Labour right-wingers . 

  They nevertheless declined to invest , and the whole " domino " strategy was soon in tatters . 

  Even though the overall union target had been cut back from 4.7 million to 2 million , only four unions came in on target : NALGO with 250,000 ; the National Union of Seamen and Fire Brigades Union with 50,000 each ; the fourth was the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers , led by the vociferously right-wing Gavin Laird . 

  It was something of a shock that the AUEW had invested at all , let alone met its target . 

  But the decision was made only hours before the share sale closed , and too late to cause a domino effect among other right-leaning unions . 

  The only union to exceed its target was Ron Todd's T and G. 

  Other unions which had either supported the earlier feasibility study , or might otherwise have been expected to be sympathetic , came up with only feeble amounts . 

  The print union , SOGAT , targeted for 150,000 , invested only 10,000 . 

  NUPE ( target 250,000 ) invested only 5,000 . and the nurses' union COHSE ( target 250,000 ) was little better with 15,000 . 

  Fourteen large unions each targeted for more than 100,000 failed to invest anything . 

  They included the National Communications Union , contributors to the earlier feasibility study , and left-wing unions such as TASS , UCATT and Clive Jenkins's ASTMS . 

  In the first week of the forty-day share sale period , the unions only invested 871,000 , and two weeks before the closing date the total had only crept up to 927,500 . 

  Despite frantic last-minute appeals , only 1,634,000 had been raised by the time the offer stopped -- still well short of the new lower target of 2 million . 

  Between them the two major planks of the strategy had yielded 5,264,500 . 

  The third target group was individual supporters and commercial investors . 

  This turned out to be an even bigger disappointment , and showed how few people were really heavily committed to the project . 

  The target was 1 million , which Walsh wanted to collect through the " thousand times a thousand " approach which had been mentioned in the original feasibility study . 

  The idea was to persuade 1,000 " rich radicals " with incomes of over 12,000 per year ( the Walsh criterion for being rich ) to put up 1,000 each . 

  Everett vetoed the suggestion as unorthodox and cranky , totally scotching a Walsh proposal that an advertisement be placed in the Guardian . 

  He explained that if the money was not raised it would destroy confidence , and anyhow such an unusual move would be very close to breaking the rules about soliciting investment . 

  As a substitute , Walsh frantically instructed everyone to turn out their address books . 

  Long lost " friends " suddenly received phone calls which quickly edged round to the appalling standard of the existing Sunday papers . 

  If the conversation did not quickly progress to the bottom line , it was swiftly terminated . 

  Various individuals came up with useful sums . 

  Horsley's father , Alec , put in 7,000 Nick Horsley , for once , bettered him with 10,000 . 

  Hilary Wainwright , the co-author of Beyond the Fragments who had joined the Board of the new company , bought 1,000 of shares . 

  Her brother Martin , a Guardian reporter and steam-train enthusiast , did likewise . 

  Hayling did not invest as he had no money . 

  Some left-wing celebrities were persuaded . 

  Julie Christie and guitarist John Williams each bought 1,000 worth . 

  Best-selling thriller writer Ken Follett , a former newspaper reporter himself , put in 10,000 . 

  But it was touch and go all the way . 

  As they entered the last fortnight of the share sale there was still a shade under half the 6.5 million to be raised . 

  Most of the London councils had paid up by then , though some of the large sums promised by the unions were still churning their way through committees . 

  Then , a body blow . 

  Just two days before the share sale was due to close , the Greater Manchester Council superannuation fund failed to come up with the expected 250,000 . 

  Like the GLC , it had been abolished , and its responsibilities passed to a joint organization of ten Manchester boroughs . 

  All had to agree to the investment , and at the last minute Stockport , the only council where Labour had lost overall control to a mixture of Tories and Liberals , vetoed the decision . 

  Caxton House and Guinness Mahon's City offices saw frantic activity as existing investors were begged over the phone to increase their contributions in a desperate bid to bridge the gap . 

  The NUR was the only one to oblige . 

  Others , including the London councils , were sympathetic but explained that it would take months , not hours , to get the decision through all the relevant committees . 

  The last nerve-wracking day was 12 August , the " Glorious Twelfth " which marks the opening of the grouse-shooting season . 

  The red line on the thermometer on the wall of Caxton House crept up with agonizing slowness . 

  If the 6.5 million target was not met in full by 5pm , it would be too late . 

  And the target was not reached . 

  At the end of the day the company was still short by 719,000 . 

  Everybody had known it would be a close thing , and the invitations sent out to the party that evening had hedged bets by inviting people to a " congratulations/ commiserations " party . 

  But the day was saved by Everett , who agreed -- after pressurizing his boss , Alastair Morton -- that Guinness Mahon would take up the remaining shares . 

  The closing rules about share issues are very strict ; ironically , this is to protect investors in successful issues . 

  The argument goes that if an issue has been over-subscribed , people who come in late already know that it has been a success and are therefore cutting down their risk . 

  But in this case , Everett argued , Guinness Mahon could take up the slack as the company fully expected other investors who had been too slow to meet the deadline to come in . 

  One of the disadvantages of the issue's timing had been people going on holiday , exacerbating the delays caused by the bureaucratic structures involved . 

  But the Guinness Mahon decision , although it had saved the company , had introduced a sobering note . 

  Everybody knew that if Everett had not stepped in to buy all those unsold shares , the company would have been a dead duck . 

  But Horsley put these thoughts to the back of his mind as he headed for the party at Caxton House , determined to enter into the spirit of things . 

  " We have a newspaper ! " he yelled as he crashed in , mopping the sweat from his brow . 

  At the NoS offices the champagne corks had been popping . 

  The celebrations were for having pulled it off , but it was also time for many people who had been involved in the project to leave . 

  For them this was the high point . 

  With the Charter and the political precepts of the paper firmly in place , all that was needed was to drag a few journalists out of the pubs and set them to work . 

  The rest would follow automatically . 

  Henry Stewart returned from a last-minute fund-raising pitch and changed out of his three-piece suit into his familiar jeans in the corridor . 

  It was the first suit he had ever owned and three sizes too big . 

  As he gulped the warm champagne he swore he would never wear it again . 

  Three days later Everett and Horsley went north to collect on the promises that had been made . 

  Though the Greater Manchester pension fund investment had been blocked by Stockport council , the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive was still game , and Everett picked up a cheque for 175,000 from a suspicious representative who demanded proof that he was really the man from Guinness Mahon . 

  Everett told him not to be so ridiculous , grabbed the cheque and ran . 

  Back in the Jaguar with Olwen , they motored north up the M6 , turning off close to Lancaster to make their way up a private road to a grey stone castle at the top of the hill , overlooking the beautiful valley of the River Lune . 

  The forbidding-looking castle , Claughton Hall , belonged to Owen Oyston , a flamboyant fifty-one-year-old self-made multi-millionaire known for his good local Labour Party connections . 

  Oyston had been brought up the son of a Durham miner and had moved to Blackpool with his parents when they went to open a boarding house . 

  He had made his millions by first cornering the estate-agency business in the gaudy resort , and then expanding throughout the north-west . 

  He showed Horsley and Everett politely round the castle , explaining how parts dated back to the fifteenth century , and telling the preposterous , but true , story of how the building , formerly the family home of the Fenwicks , had been shifted stone by stone from the foot of the hill in the 1930s to give it the spectacular view it now enjoyed . 

  Everett and Horsley were both intrigued . 

  They had heard of Oyston , who had originally been contacted as a cold call , but they had never met him . 

  He was an interesting character , with the raffish air of a nineteenth-century showman and a goatee beard and longish hair to match . 

  He even kept six shaggy bison in the grounds of his castle , and had a Wild West hat which he donned to complete the pioneer image . 

  Oyston's estate-agency fortune had been based on the sort of direct contact with the people to which NoS was aspiring . 

  He had moved in and taken the stuffiness out of the business , slaughtering its " professional " pretensions , and bringing it on to the High Street long before the present new wave of trendy estate agents . 

  His slogan was " NO SALE -- NO FEE ! " 

  If he did not sell a property there was no charge , and at a time when other agents charged for everything down to advertisements in the papers , this was a popular and profitable revolution , which added to the image of " man of the people " . 

  This had been further enhanced recently by his appearance in television ads for the estate agency chain , which suggested his decision to give up an earlier acting career had been a smart move . 

  That career had peaked with a part as a junior barrister in Granada TV's Crown Court . 

  Now , in the television ads , he cheerfully delivered some hammy lines before falling backwards into a swimming pool . 

  Other Lancashire businessmen watching his progress had come to respect him as a red-hot entrepreneur and ruthless opponent in business dealings , for whom profit was the consideration that overrode every other . 

  They noted with some awe the way he had risen to become one of the richest men in the county . 

  Oyston was now moving across into the media , using the same formula of low overheads , tight management and aggressive advertising . 

  He had bought up the loss-making Radio Aire in Leeds and Red Rose in Preston , and turned them round . 

  Both , along with Red Dragon in Cardiff , which he also picked up , were now showing a healthy profit . 

  Next had come the much bigger step in to cable television , which he believes will one day be a major community resource and the source of enormous profits through home-order shopping on two-way TV lines . 

  By the time Horsley met him he had won the franchise for Lancashire Cable , had a controlling interest in Merseyside Cable , and was looking for other cable companies . 

  Politically Everett and Horsley also found him intriguing . 

  Oyston kept close connections with local Labour parties , and helped with schemes to provide jobs and start small businesses . 

  He had been one of the founders of Lancashire Enterprise , started in the early 1980s by the controlling Labour Group on the county council , and financed by a 2p rate . 

  The organization , based in nearby Preston , put money into promising new businesses in return for a share in any future profits . 

  Although it had originally been derided by the other parties , it was now a local success story , backing businesses which employed a total of 2,500 people , and had gained all-party support . 

  The project was typical of Oyston , who is a " corporatist " , advocating co-operation between government locally and nationally , the banks and private entrepreneurs such as himself . 

  He believes this " tripartite alliance " is the reason for Japan's rise to domination in world markets , and the only way that Britain's true industrial base can be saved . 

  It makes him a hard man to place on the political spectrum , as he is in some respects an avowed admirer of Thatcher . 

  But at the same time he totally disagrees with the way she has given the banks a free hand to put resources behind new " non-industries " such as the service industries , and concentrate economic wealth in the south . 

  Oyston sees the north being reduced to Third World status , and is alarmed that the country is being taken over by foreign investment . 

  The tour of the castle over , Oyston seated his NoS guests in the draughty baronial hall and explained his views as they sipped some of his own-label champagne . 

  Olwen found this incredibly vulgar -- she had not been impressed by the mixture of genuine antiques and large hideous brass objects which gave away Oyston's boarding-house background . 

  Nobody had been quite sure either what to make of the stuffed animal heads on the wall , and the large crocodile sprawled across one of the floors . 

  She suppressed an embarrassed chortle as the men began to chat about the paper . 

  Oyston knew NoS was desperate for money , but Everett thought his decision to invest was quite impulsive . 

  After consultation with his lawyer and right-hand man , Michael Connolly , Oyston wrote out a cheque for 100,000 and made to hand it over . 

  But as he was passing it across he paused halfway , holding the precious piece of paper up by three fingers . 

  There was one condition he had not mentioned -- he wanted a seat on the Board as a non-executive director , in line with his standard policy when putting a significant amount into a company . 

  Everett and Horsley consulted each other quickly , then agreed . 

  They waved goodbye at the door and got into the Jaguar well pleased at the chunk which had been taken out of the Guinness Mahon share mountain . 

  Back at the castle , Oyston had already written off the 100,000 . 

  Down in London there was only one thing spoiling the continuing party atmosphere . 

  Now was the time the comrades had dreaded , when they would have to move over and allow the company to be managed by the " persons of experience and ability " as they had promised in the prospectus . 

  But Horsley did not seem to see things like that , and he had cheered them up mightily with a little speech congratulating them all and insisting " the team " must stay together . 

  It had already been decided that Hayling was to remain as chief executive , and everyone who had been doing a specific job for the company was invited to carry on . 

  Walsh became Marketing Director on a salary of 20,000 , and with a 1.5 million budget . 

  But the two of them had had a falling-out on the night of the capitalization party . 

  Walsh had accused Hayling of keeping financial information from him and the others , and Hayling had countered saying Walsh had no need or right to know . 

  It had been a bitter row . 

  Ben Lowe was the only person doing a specific job for News on Sunday who demanded a competitive interview . 

  He wanted the job of national regional manager -- in charge of the complex network of local committees which he had himself established -- and was distraught when Walsh and Hayling offered him only the assistant's job . 

  Brought in over him was Tony Cook , a good-natured and permanently jolly NoS regional activist and successful businessman who had invested 6,000 of his own money in the paper . 

  Other management jobs only went to outsiders if there were no internal candidates . 

  There were three such positions . 

  Gerry Taylor , the ex-managing director of the Guardian , came in to organize advertising sales as principal consultant to the Board . 

  The two other new jobs went to people who could hardly be described as outsiders , even though they had not been either Founders or members of the Executive Committee . 

  Vince Luck was brought in as finance director from Northern Foods . 

  Christine Jackson , a Manchester-based national officer of the Equal Opportunities Commission and personal friend of Horsley for thirty years , became Director of Personnel in charge of Equal Opportunities . 

  After some agonizing over whether they were confident enough to do their respective jobs , ex-Big Flame member Tony Hodgson became Production Manager and Liz Cooper gave up her job as Circulation Manager of the New Statesman to take up the same position on the new paper . 

  At the capitalization party a number of well-wishers had wandered in from the various Labour movement campaigns and organizations which shared the Caxton House office block with NoS . 

  One of them had been Keith Sutton , taking a break from editing the anti-Murdoch strike paper , the Wapping Post , in the office below . 

  Hayling had seemed unusually pleased to see him and offered him some champagne . 

  Sutton , who had gone teetotal , refused . 

  " You've done the easy bit , Alan , " he joked , sipping orange juice . 

  " Now all you've got to do is produce the paper . " 

  It was an obvious remark to make , but Sutton was surprised by the response . 

  " Well , " Hayling whispered with a twinkle in his eye , " that's largely going to be up to you , mate ! " 

  Officegate 

  Choosing an editor 

  Raising the 6.5 million , " the largest sum ever attracted by a radical project in Britain' according to the publicity blurb , had been either a heroic achievement by selfless , dedicated humanitarians or the blag of the century . 

  John Pilger had no doubts . 

  " I had little to do with raising the money , but I watched in considerable awe those who did : Alan Hayling , Horsley , Chris Walsh and others . 

  As one door would close , they would move on to another , never surrendering faith in the need for a popular paper that , in Hayling's words , " at the very least reflects the decent humanity in this country " , " he wrote in the journalists' trade paper , UK Press Gazette . 

  Under the title " How we will revive the lost arts of the tabloids " , Pilger laid down the criteria : " dramatic , uncropped pictures which the old Express displayed with such flair ; original well-written investigations which the Sunday Times " Insight Team pioneered ( I count the old Sunday Times as a great popular paper ) ; and the use of writer-photographer teams which Picture Post and the Mirror used with such power . " 

  The paper's job was to warn its readers when they were being conned by " governments , opposition parties , vested interests , food manufacturers , sporting authorities , the media , powerful individuals and so on " . 

  The paper would challenge authority , never " preach " to its readers , and would not just publish political tracts of the left . 

  To the outside world it seemed that the man who was providing such a detailed vision of the paper would be editor . 

  Pilger was the only nationally known journalist mentioned in the prospectus ; one muddled council had even noted : " The editor will be John Pilger of the Financial Times . " 

  But Pilger was not prepared to move to Manchester . 

  He wanted to " shape " the paper from London , and took the job of editor in chief , with an editor to work under him . 

  The editor's primary responsibility would be the tedious business of bringing the paper out every week . 

  But it would be more than just a production job . 

  The editor would also have the authority to make decisions when Pilger was away on one of his frequent trips abroad , within guidelines which Pilger would lay down . 

  This was an unusual arrangement which might have worked in a perfect world . 

  But in reality it was a compromise designed to bring the long factional struggle about Pilger's role to an end . 

  Pilger would be allowed to be editor in chief , but to take the job he would have to resign from the Board of Directors . 

  Pilger and Hayling wrote a job description outlining the editor in chief's total power over the editor , which was to be shown to applicants for the editor's job so they would know the position . 

  Pilger , as editor in chief , would have " overall editorial control " , and his vision , ideas and contacts would essentially create the paper . 

  The editor would edit on a " day to day basis " in Manchester . 

  There were about twenty applications for the editor's job , which were marked up under headings of " politics " ( most got zero ) and " experience " . 

  Politics , of course , was not just a matter of party or creed , but how many Right-On points were scored for being black or female . 

  Unfortunately no blacks applied , and only one woman . 

  To help sort things out , little comments such as " sincere/ wet " , " overzealous " , and " pompous " were attached to the more promising applications . 

  Most were not considered worth interviewing , but a shortlist was drawn up for interview at the Northern Foods flat in Clarges Street . 

  The interviewing panel of Horsley , Pilger and Hayling , with Kerry Brown and Maxine Johnson representing the Founders , was supplemented by Christine Jackson , sitting in and limbering up for Equal Opportunities . 

  The candidates had been asked to supply a dummy paper with a lead story and some idea of content . 

  The best was supplied by an immensely experienced journalist with a suitably northern background . 

  His dummy , leading on the story of a northern factory which was allegedly poisoning its workers , had been marked down as brilliant and just the sort of hard-hitting stuff the paper wanted . 

  But his interview was a different matter . 

  He arrived forty-five minutes late and entered the room in an oddly measured fashion . 

  He took off his jacket with over-exaggerated deliberation , folded it with studied care , and placed it on the floor , parroting a curious sales pitch of clichd adspeak . 

  " I can produce you a great paper , " he drawled . 

  " A really great paper ... . " 

  He was white , male , middle-aged and middle-class and therefore scored zero Right-On points . 

  But as they started to grill him on such matters as his attitude to South Africa and Northern Ireland , it was his actions , not his befuddled replies , which riveted the panel's attention . 

  He appeared to be searching for some key document . 

  He emptied out the contents of his briefcase one object at a time before moving on to his pockets . 

  Each item he retrieved was examined with great care , and he took the opportunity to do some elementary housekeeping by discarding unwanted minutiae of his life . 

  Scraps of paper looking like old bus tickets were placed neatly on the carpet . 

  The panel sat mesmerized until it slowly began to dawn that the applicant appeared to be suffering from the old Fleet Street problem of being tired and emotional . 

  After twenty minutes Christine Jackson passed a tart note to Horsley , who looked up sharply and abruptly concluded the interview . 

  Until he got Jackson's note he had been convinced that the man was suffering from some sort of regular illness . 

  The other interviews went smoothly enough . 

  The female candidate , Barbara Dalzell , a New Zealand journalist from the Financial Times , made a good impression and was reluctantly rejected as lacking experience . 

  But what the rest of the candidates did not know was that Pilger had already earmarked someone for the job -- the man who had gatecrashed the capitalization-day party -- Keith Sutton of the Wapping Post . 

  Pilger had met Sutton whilst making a film for Australian television about the Wapping dispute . 

  They had a common cause against Murdoch , publisher of the filthy Sun , and Pilger was impressed that Sutton was bringing the Wapping strike paper out on a shoestring . 

  The two men found they agreed on many points about today's press . 

  Sutton , a former sub-editor on the Sunday Times colour magazine , explained how he had started the Post with only his faithful assistant Carmel Bedford , a former Sunday Times copytaker . 

  He had laid out the pages , subbed copy , written articles and thought of stunts and headlines . 

  As more people arrived to help , the Wapping Post became a focus for the " refusenik " journalists , who got their nickname from their refusal to go to Wapping . 

  Many , particularly from The Times and Sunday Times , had been on the papers in Gray's Inn Road and Printing House Square all their working lives , and for most of them the strike was about more than trade-union principles . 

  The Sunday Times had always been a special paper , particularly in the Harold Evans days , when , with stories like Thalidomide and the Insight coverage of Northern Ireland , it could lay claim to being the greatest in the world . 

  For the journalists , resentment at the move to Wapping and the slaughtering of 5,500 print workers' jobs was combined with bitterness at Murdoch's destruction of the papers' esprit de corps and journalistic standards . 

  Murdoch's motivation was simply profit , and his cynical attitude had already led to a mass exodus of high-minded journalists . 

  The Times had been reduced from being the " top people's paper " to running a form of bingo based on stock-market prices . 

  Wapping had split the staff on both papers . 

  Many of those who moved were deeply ashamed and riddled , with guilt as they were bussed into the plant , hiding under the seats from their former colleagues on the picket at the gate . 

  Many of the others -- broke and sickened by the attitude of their non-refusenik colleagues , who included most of the staff of the Sun and the News of the World -- experienced personal traumas as they struggled with the difficulties of what was obviously becoming a futile protest . 

  The Post was a way to fight back using their undoubted journalistic skills . 

  Lew Chester , one of the paper's greatest reporters , turned up and started knocking out his usual classy feature articles . 

  Brian Whitaker , who had been editor of the Insight team , and had remained alone in the old Grays Inn Road Sunday Times building finishing a book on the sinking of Greenpeace's Rainbow Warrior , brought along his production skills . 

  Sutton's energy and commitment had bound the people on the Wapping Post together with fierce loyalty to each other and their publication . 

  His most notorious story was a psychoanalysis of Rupert Murdoch based on material from sources including the office cleaners . 

  It was incredibly rude . 

  A cartoon of a naked Murdoch , complete with tits and with his privates covered by a copy of the Sun , appeared under the headline MURDOCH ON THE COUCH and the subhead IT'S RUPERT THE BARE WEEK IN YOUR PEACEFULLY PICKETING POST . 

  Inside Sutton dredged up personal details , such as Murdoch insisting the fringes of his Indian carpets be combed into regimented lines every morning and that there must be no marks left behind by the wheels of the Hoover . 

  Details of the state of his toilet had been supplied by the cleaners and " a Harley Street analyst " concluded that the Australian media mogul had never overcome struggles with his mother over toilet training . 

  Sutton gleefully added a further strapline : THE DIRTY TRICKS IN LITTLE RUPERT'S POTTY WORLD . 

  The story was a riposte to a similar stunt pulled on Tony Benn by the Sun . 

  Delighted , Benn told a refusenik rally that if the striking miners had had a paper like the Wapping Post they would have won . 

  Sutton had been deeply moved by this compliment . 

  He had begun working on plans to turn the Wapping Post into a national strike paper when Pilger tipped him off that he was first in line for the editor's job at News on Sunday . 

  As a leader of a protest against a key Thatcherite hate figure , he was the obvious choice . 

  And his general background , a useful blend of the traditional and the unconventional , fitted well with NoS . 

  Born in 1945 , Sutton was brought up in a Nissen hut , the son of a mechanic and a hairdresser . 

  He made it to grammar school in Woking , leaving at sixteen with enough O-levels to get a traineeship on the local Surrey Advertiser . 

  By the age of twenty-one he was on Fleet Street , married with a mortgage , and was living in suffocating respectability in Rayleigh , Essex . 

  His progress up the ladder of the Street was rapid , from the Daily Mail to Associate Features Editor at the Express and then Features Editor on the London Evening News . 

  His main rival at the Express was another young rising star , Kelvin Mackenzie , who handled news . 

  But whilst Mackenzie carried on and ended up editing the Sun , Sutton began to question what he was doing . 

  He took nine months off between jobs and dabbled in commune life , with a period at Laurieston Hall , the alternative centre on the Scottish Borders . 

  Then in 1975 he " dropped out " altogether , moving into the alternative society full-time as a squatting activist in south London . 

  Sutton was one of the organizers of the famous occupation of Harry Hyams's Centre Point office block in the winter of 1975 . 

  With another group of activists he later co-ordinated another well-publicized protest after the GLC's " Fare's Fair " cheap public transport proposals had been overruled by the Master of the Rolls , Lord Denning . 

  As a stunt Sutton and thirty others queued at a bus stop , got on the bus , and changed into home-made " Lord Denning " gowns , complete with wigs made out of carpet tiles . 

  The bus was made to stop on Westminster Bridge , where the " Lord Dennings " filed off for the benefit of the world's press , to the accompaniment of a reading by Heathcote Williams , the alternative poet . 

  Throughout this period Sutton continued to work Saturday-night shifts at the Sunday Mirror as a sub-editor , and decided to catch up on his education by taking a BA in history at Goldsmiths College , part of the University of London . 

  After graduating he moved to the Royal Holloway College to research a Ph. D . 

  on nineteenth-century radical newspapers . 

  He became enormously interested in these papers and the effect they had at a time when many people thought Britain was on the brink of popular revolution . 

  And he was delighted to find that these forerunners of pop journalism had used the same skills as those on which he prided himself to stamp events into the nation's consciousness . 

  Most impressive of all was the reporting of the 1819 " Peterloo " massacre , when the Manchester Yeomen of the Guard slaughtered destitute hand-loom weavers protesting about their version of new technology -- the mass-production steam mills . 

  The massacre really took place on Saint Peter's Field , but a sharp writer on the radical Manchester Observer linked the outrage to the battle of Waterloo , coming up with the headline " Peterloo " . 

  The phrase caught on , and although Peterloo was only one of several similar incidents around that time , it became the one people remembered . 

  That , for Sutton , was what journalism was all about . 

  But his research ended when his grant ran out , and he took a mundane job as a sub-editor on the Sunday Times colour magazine just before the Wapping dispute began . 

  Sutton's political credentials helped win the approval of the Founders . 

  And whether he knew it or not , he could be marked down as one of Wainwright and Hayling's " Fragments " -- a talented 1960s person who had now matured and wanted to bring his skills back into the mainstream . 

  Pilger , on the other hand , was more interested in Sutton's production skills and in satisfying himself that he could be entrusted with that side of the paper -- not easy with a new start-up and the complexities of the new technology . 

  Sutton had taken great care over his written application for the editorship ; even his later detractors say it was brilliant . 

  His dummy was excellent , but there were doubts in the question-and-answer section of the interview , when Pilger thought he detected a certain woodenness in his replies after the initial pitch . 

  Sutton was called round the day after the formal interview to double-check , and was much more relaxed in sweater and jeans . 

  But although Maxine Johnson of the Founders still had doubts , he clinched the deal with his easy and cheerful manner . 

  There was a slight hiccup when he demanded a salary of 40,000 . 

  Pilger supported the payment , on the grounds that the editor should not feel a poor relation in Fleet Street . 

  Hayling , however , was scandalized . 

  In an interview with the Guardian when his dummy had been published almost a year previously , he had specifically said the paper " would not pay 40,000 wages " . 

  But someone had to be got into the job quickly and there were no other obvious candidates . 

  It was only after his appointment had been confirmed that Sutton demanded a nine-month notice period , which was in such stark contravention of the paper's equality principles that Christine Jackson took his contract to the Board . 

  It was approved . 

  Two days after the interview , Sutton's appointment was ratified by the Founders , who had the right , as holders of the Golden Share , to veto his appointment if they chose . 

  They asked him how he proposed to work with Pilger and , to his surprise , told him that he had far more power than Pilger had led him to believe . 

  Walsh pointed out to Sutton that it was he , and not Pilger , who had the final say about what went in the paper . 

  Joan Bohanna was worried that Pilger might use the paper to say what he , rather than they , wanted . 

  Sutton promised to make sure this did not happen . 

  Maxine Johnson , who had been uneasy at his interview , was worried about whether Sutton would " be able to stand up to Pilger " . 

  But for the moment that remained to be seen , for the jet-setter was about to leave for Australia again to make a three-part film assessing his country on its bicentennial . 

  The film was to be broadcast in January 1988 . 

  The formalities over , editor in chief Pilger laid out his plans to his new editor . 

  Colleagues he had worked with all over the world were to form a network of stringers . 

  An investigations unit would be set up in London , staffed by reputable heavyweight journalists he had already selected . 

  The three women who made up the much-admired Daily Mirror Reader Service , introduced in 1944 but cut by Maxwell ( on New Year's Eve 1985 , the same day as Pilger himself had been " purged " , as he put it ) , would come en masse , providing an unmatchable advice forum for the paper's buyers . 

  A first-class woman columnist would come from the Liverpool Post , along with the man to fill the key job of chief sub-editor . 

  Leaving Sutton to chase up and entice these people , Pilger got on the plane and disappeared Down Under . 

  " We want journalists " 

  With Pilger out of the way , Sutton began to find his way around the organization on his own . 

  He was getting on fine with the Founders . 

  He had even discovered that John Bohanna , their honorary secretary , shared his admiration for Robert Tressell's classic novel , The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists . 

  In contrast to Pilger , Sutton was approachable and friendly . 

  He was enthusiastic about the paper being located in Manchester , whereas Pilger had clashed with them over the move . 

  They called him " Keith " , whereas Pilger was pointedly called by his surname . 

  And now he was to have his first big test as editor at a gathering at an old Big Flame haunt , the Beechwood conference centre near Leeds , a worker's co-operative , complete with wholefood canteen . 

  The conference was being arranged for the Founders and regional activists to meet the newly arriving senior staff . 

  The agenda gave Sutton a golden opportunity to stamp his authority on the paper . 

  They asked him to make a speech entitled : " What kind of paper and how we're going to sell 1.5 million . " 

  Sutton pitched straight in . 

  He told them there was no point in producing a more expensive , national version of City Limits , the Right-On London listings magazine started by former employees of Time Out and helped into the world by the GLC . 

  The only game in town was mass circulation , and that was to be achieved by NoS becoming an aggressively popular tabloid . 

  He whipped the lo October edition of the Sun out of his pocket and brandished the front page . 

  The splash read : THE LIARS -- WHOPPERS ASIANS TOLD AT HEATHROW . 

  Below was a racist article about immigration control . 

  It was Sutton's chance for revenge on his old foe Kelvin Mackenzie . 

  He changed from his normal calm self into a frenzy . 

  The veins standing out on his neck , he shouted at the top of his voice : " We're going to crucify this stuff . 

  It's filth ! " 

  He began punching the paper , sending flurries of cheap newsprint showering to the ground . 

  " We're going to go round to Mackenzie's house and we're going to ask his daughter what she thinks of this and we're going to take pictures of him and we're going to run our own front page with a picture of him and a bloody great headline which says RACIST ! " 

  The meeting was thrilled . 

  This was no simple production assistant . 

  This was a man with spirit ! 

  The Founders and regional activists loved it . 

  But Hayling felt sick . 

  It was so vulgar . 

  This was not what he and Pilger wanted at all -- he had better let him know what was happening . 

  News of Sutton's sudden elevation from humble production editor to rabble-rousing orator reached Pilger in Australia from Ben Lowe as well as Hayling . 

  He was slightly alarmed . 

  Lowe wrote claiming that Sutton was trying to undermine him and forge an alliance with the Founders . 

  Now , pushed to produce a dummy for potential advertisers , Sutton had started interviewing and recruiting journalists . 

  The editor in chief , from Australia , tried to keep in touch . 

  His anxiety mounted as telexes were left unanswered and calls blocked by Martin Huckerby , another Wapping refusenik whom Sutton had recruited as the paper's managing editor . 

  Huckerby , a worried-looking , balding man , had a responsible position which basically involved overseeing editorial expenditure and running the paper day to day , but was best known for fussing round the office collecting old coffee cups and switching off the lights last thing at night . 

  He infuriated Pilger , who referred to him as Sutton's " butler " . 

  Pilger was worried by the descriptions of Sutton's Beechwood performance , but was more concerned that progress should be made on his list of key editorial appointments . 

  Left behind in England , Sutton had found many of the people on Pilger's list unenthusiastic about leaving secure and well-paid jobs for the uncharted seas of a Pilgerite Quality Tabloid edited by Sutton . 

  John Merritt , a young reporter then on the Mirror , by whom Pilger set much store , was particularly difficult to pin down . 

  And there were further problems presented by News on Sunday's GLC-type Equal Opportunities commitments . 

  The Founders were particularly keen on these , and urged more efforts to recruit blacks and women -- unqualified if need be , and to be trained on the job . 

  They criticized Christine Jackson for not doing enough . 

  They minuted " grave reservations " about her , and resolved to " bring to the attention of the board the limitation of Christine Jackson's skills " . 

  Jackson ploughed on regardless . 

  An extraordinary advertisement simply headed " Journalists " -- giving scant information on what jobs were on offer and what qualifications were required for them -- was placed in the Guardian and black papers such as the Voice . 

  An equally extraordinary number of replies found their way back in a deluge to Manchester . 

  Nobody knows exactly how many there were , but estimates range up to 5,000 . 

  Each received a bizarre open-ended application form , a baffling collection of leaflets , including the Charter and material about Equal Opportunities , and a list of a large number of jobs open to anyone who fancied trying one of them . 

  " Ever worked on a street barrow ? " one leaflet asked . 

  Why not apply to be editor of the paper's glossy colour section ? -- the equivalent of a colour supplement and usually put together by large teams of highly skilled and experienced specialists . 

  A nineteen-year-old insurance agent was one who did just that . 

  He did not get the job . 

  Pilger , in drawing up his list for Sutton , had cheerfully ignored Right-On methods of recruitment , bypassing and snubbing the Founders again . 

  Bending the Equal Opportunities rules , he had used the normal method of tipping off chosen journalists and assuring them their applications would go through smoothly . 

  But those on the list who actually applied , as opposed to expressing vague interest , had no way of knowing whether their completed application forms had been weeded out or simply thrown on to the paper mountain along with everyone else . 

  The whole process quickly got out of control . 

  Applications varied wildly in calibre and content . 

  Some were superbly typed or run off the ubiquitous Amstrad printer . 

  Others were handwritten and virtually illiterate . 

  Long political screeds were attached about what the paper should be like , pleading justifications of position and talent . 

  Hopefuls who wanted to be journalists promised bounds of enthusiasm , and optimistically said they would learn the rest . 

  Burnt-out old hacks explained a sudden new lease of life , promising their days in the public-relations ghetto were over . 

  There were lots of hopefuls who would have been journalists if they had pursued a career , or who now wanted to learn . 

  All , of course , were hugely talented . 

  Once the usual carpetbaggers , liars and opportunists had been discounted , there was a heart-lifting common thread , a real desire to work for a paper promising to lift them out of the cynicism and virtual despair of the current newspaper scene . 

  Older reporters fed up with the declining standards of Fleet Street ; younger ones condemned to the grind of sycophantic local newspapers owned by disinterested big groups ; good freelances -- all were ready to start work . 

  Contained in the application forms was the core of a first-class and committed newspaper staff . 

  Here were the people who were now convinced the paper existed and wanted to join the venture . 

  Motives were mixed . 

  A few were prepared to take big salary cuts and throw away the security of their present employment -- others were just grateful for a job or the chance to work on a national . 

  Some were doubtful whether it would actually work , but all shared a hope of something new , and all were to be given an equal chance . 

  As teams of temps struggled to cope with the mounting chaos , Jackson tried to keep the Equal Opportunities flame burning . 

  She reported sternly to a meeting of the management team that word-of-mouth recruitment might be taking place . 

  Anyone doing this , she said , " is likely to be acting unlawfully " . 

  The team , as usual lacking expertise in the particular field , agreed , and laid down criteria for positive discrimination to fight back . 

  Each department was set a minimum target of 52 per cent women and 10 per cent ethnic minorities . 

  As an aside Jackson promised to investigate providing the blind with the paper on weekly cassette . 

  But she had already lost her balance as she impossibly tried to juggle Equal Opportunities , shortage of staff and time , and the torrent of " open access " job applications . 

  And by now there was pressure to hire staff , with the launch date less than six months away . 

  If any reporters were to be poached from other papers , they would mostly need to give three months' notice . 

  The Founders and other people within NoS kept up the pressure to go even further down the Equal Opportunities road . 

  The equal opportunities committee , set up by London office administrator Zoe Picton-Howell , had gone into mothballs after getting the executive committee to co-opt Sylvia Collier as " editorial co-ordinator " . 

  Now it sprang back into life . 

  Picton-Howell's main mission in life was to record faithfully the minutes of the many meetings she attended . 

  But she had spent many years perfecting the art of the memo . 

  She was a shy , quiet woman in her mid-twenties with a tinkling nervous laugh . 

  Her father , Tom Picton , was the NoS photographer . 

  Picton-Howell had worked hard for the project since the early days , and had kept her old job as London office administrator on Equal Opportunities grounds that the post should not be put out to competitive interview after capitalization . 

  The logic of this " Equal Opportunities " argument escaped most people . 

  Picton-Howell , who later became an editorial researcher , now bombarded Jackson with demands about maternity leave , paternity leave , day-nursery facilities and more mundane and familiar matters such as car mileage allowance and overtime payments . 

  With determination in her large , watery blue eyes and a doleful expression permanently on her face , Jackson moved to quash the revolt . 

  A crche was written off in favour of a child-minding allowance and the demand for equal paternity and maternity leave refused . 

  Taking the traditional and un-Right-On view of child-bearing , Jackson told the staff that women needed time to recover physically . 

  Equality did apply to some things . 

  The staff were informed that the company could not afford to pay overtime to anyone -- regardless of sex , race , age or disability . 

  The car allowance , a key item in reporters' lives and in getting them out of the office -- was fixed at Option B -- 15p a mile . 

  One of the sub-editors , a former vicar with a most un-Christian vocabulary , later pointed out that this was less than the Church of England paid its clergy . 

  Whilst Jackson struggled not to offend black outreach workers , the system for processing the application forms buckled under the weight of numbers and its inbuilt defects . 

  Under the " open access " policy , people applied for different jobs in as many as three separate departments . 

  Each form had to be copied and sent to a different department editor . 

  Some went to London , others were returned to Manchester . 

  And then there were other copies for the Founders , who were to attend interviews and vet applicants . 

  Soon the demands grew so heavy the photocopier could not cope , and originals began to fly about the system . 

  Hayling added to the confusion by taking away applications from blacks , which were put aside for positive consideration . 

  There were disappointingly few . 

  Hayling had realized that although women's interests were being looked after on the paper , there was already suspicion of NoS in the black community . 

  Blacks were right to be suspicious . 

  They had met Right-Ons before . 

  Soon the system was in total chaos . 

  There is no record to say how many applications , and for what jobs , were finally considered . 

  Cuttings and examples of previous newspaper or magazine work were separated from the application forms , depriving the editors of the main thing they needed to judge them by . 

  Some were lost by hapless temps . 

  For months afterwards copies of forms turned up all over the Manchester office . 

  They were found at the bottom of drawers , in filing cabinets , and stuffed in amongst other papers . 

  One large pile of forms with attached items of a non-standard size was uncovered , apparently untouched , weeks after they had arrived . 

  All over the country hurt and disillusioned journalists and would-be journalists wondering why they had never received a reply could only presume that they had been rejected . 

  Pilger managed one brief telephone conversation with Sutton while he was in Australia . 

  He was very worried about the lack of progress with recruiting the people on his list . 

  Pilger told him they had better get together for a serious talk the minute he got off the plane . 

  News on Sunday's temporary London offices in GLEB were available for the summit , but Pilger instead hired a room in the Kennedy Hotel , a modem businessman's establishment next to Euston station . 

  Sutton was told to get on the first train from Manchester . 

  The two men have different versions of the meeting which followed , and there were no witnesses except for a waiter who interrupted them in the middle of the shouting match and asked if they wanted any sandwiches . 

  They did not . 

  They agree , however , on four points : the pleasantries lasted about thirty seconds ; there was a terrible row ; one of them stormed out ; and the word " cock " was used . 

  According to Sutton , Pilger made him cancel interviews which had taken a long time to set up . 

  He had not got very far with Pilger's list . 

  He did not know the people on it and they did not seem as keen to join as he had expected . 

  And more and more the fast-approaching deadline of the next dummy edition was pressing on his mind . 

  He met Pilger in the foyer and they went up to the room . 

  Pilger had laid on a lot of beer . 

  Sutton got the impression Pilger was " going to really put me through it " . 

  He found him agitated and anxious and thumping the table , demanding to discuss the two men's roles in relation to each other . 

  Sutton says Pilger " went bananas " and kept repeating : " Listen , cock ! 

  Listen , cock ! " 

  He strode round the room shouting : " I am number one , cock . 

  You are number two . 

  What's more , cock , I expect you to treat your number two in exactly the same way . " 

  Sutton says he was astonished . 

  He had been in scenes like this with his teenage daughters , and he kept thinking : " I must stay cool . " 

  Pilger then got even more upset and accused him of wanting to produce the Daily Star . 

  Then Sutton , says he , got narked and asked Pilger why he had not applied for the editor's job himself . 

  Pilger said he could not because of Manchester and added : " I suppose there is not even an office there for me ? " 

  Sutton replied that there was not . 

  He'd decided that if Pilger was only going to be there one day a week he could share an office with Hayling . 

  Then he started winding Pilger up , saying over and over again : " Why are not you editor , then ? " 

  Pilger , furious , was eventually provoked enough to shout : " You've had it , cock ! 

  I am going to see Hayling and Horsley . " 

  He stormed out , paid the bill at reception and disappeared . 

  Sutton peeped round the door and , when he realized Pilger had gone , followed him . 

  The beer was abandoned . 

  He went round to the Observer where his girlfriend Stephanie Thompson worked and told her what had happened . 

  Pilger remembers it differently . 

  According to him , Sutton was uptight from the moment he walked in . 

  He set the tone by drawing out a plan of the Manchester office . 

  First he pointed out his own editorial cubicle , then the adjacent one which he explained was for his personal assistant , Carmel Bedford . 

  Pilger was certain that Sutton's accent dropped several social degrees and ended up strong south London . 

  Sutton looked Pilger straight in the eye , jabbed at his chest and announced : " There's nowhere there for you , cock . " 

  Pilger says he was flabbergasted . 

  When he got his breath back he told Sutton it was imperative they sat down that night , the next night , the night after -- however long it would take to thrash out a plan for the paper . 

  He ploughed on , trying to outline his plans for the paper , and engage Sutton's attention . 

  But Sutton suddenly seemed weary . 

  He slumped in a chair with his head in his hands and told Pilger he was already exhausted by the workload and the pressures . 

  Suddenly he snapped , got up and announced sharply : " I am not having any of this editor-in-chief bullshit . " 

  The meeting ended abruptly and both men walked out . 

  Pilger could not believe it . 

  He rang both Hayling and Horsley . 

  " We've got a real problem , " he told them . 

  Obviously only one of these recollections can be correct , but whichever it is made little practical difference . 

  From this point the foundation of the editorial side of the paper , the working arrangement between the two men , collapsed . 

  For Pilger the drama reached almost Shakespearian proportions . 

  It was not quite the end of the world as we know it , but it was close . 

  In a letter to Horsley nine days later he wrote : " I believe that if the decision is made to go the way of the Sun , the tragedy will be of historic proportions . 

  Keith Sutton ... brings us the worst of Fleet Street , the Sun , disguised as " radical " ... you can not be radical and look like the Sun ; it is a contradiction in terms . 

  The way the Sun looks is an integral part of its violent approach to almost everything : its anti-humanism . 

  It is laughable to suggest it represents " a tradition " . 

  I want no part of that " tradition " . 

  Nor should News on Sunday be part of it . 

  " Noble failure " was mentioned yesterday . 

  Worse than that would be success by means that in no way reflect the need for a radical , popular paper . " 

  He concluded that he shared responsibility for hiring Sutton . 

  " I think , via him , the Sun " tradition " will hijack News on Sunday ... . 

  The prospect of a betrayal of everything News on Sunday has meant to so many people is there ... 

  I believe Keith should go . " 

  And although Sutton had offered to continue working with Pilger , the answer was quite clear : " Of course I will not be able to work with him . " 

  The Pilger-Sutton split had an immediate effect on staff recruitment . 

  Both men had to approve senior editorial appointments ; now they were deadlocked . 

  Each appointment became a battle in the war between them . 

  To get things moving , Sutton skirted both the Equal Opportunities and the Pilger problem by hiring people on temporary consultancy contracts . 

  Brian Whitaker , who had worked on the Wapping Post and the Hayling dummy , had applied for the job of editor and , although he had not been interviewed , was taken on by Sutton as his deputy . 

  Another key job , Features Editor -- or Assistant Editor ( Features ) in NoS -speak -- had been filled by Polly Pattullo , who had served more years than she cares to remember on the Observer colour supplement before wilting under its increasing consumer bias . 

  Weary of the general air of malaise in the Observer office , she had written round . 

  Although she was a feminist , her primary motivation for joining NoS was the challenge of working on a tabloid . 

  And she saw another plus point . 

  Living in Manchester would allow her to escape from Yuppified Clapham . 

  Pattullo and Whitaker were in turn lining up staff . 

  Sports editor Bob Edwell , who had come from the Daily Express in London , was looking for sports writers , and above all the paper needed its back bench staffed by the all-important sub-editors , who prepare the reporters' words ( the copy ) for the paper , and write the headlines . 

  On NoS they were being treated to the miracle of new technology , bypassing the National Graphical Association compositors who , before the age of " direct entry " computers , retyped the articles on Linotype hot metal machines after the subs had marked them up in pencil . 

  Most important of all , a chief sub was needed . 

  The chief sub , more than anyone else , would be responsible for the look of the paper . 

  Sutton , to the alarm of Pilger and Hayling , had lined up John Hetherington of the Daily Star , a scarcely less provocative choice than the Sun . 

  The appointment was immediately blocked ( two months later , when the ban was lifted , Hetherington was no longer interested ) . 

  The fight over appointments became more and more bitter and added to the all-engulfing problems of Christine Jackson's recruiting operation , with its Equal Opportunities commitments . 

  As Sutton pushed each new recruit through on the grounds of urgency , he would gain a new ally . 

  He and Pilger were now at each other's throats , with the showdown already on the horizon -- the dummy edition of Sunday 7 December . 

  The dummy was needed , Hayling said , to show to potential advertisers and help start up the advertising sales process . 

  It was also to be used to feed the market-research obsession . 

  Sutton's first dummy 

  This was to be the first chance to see what Sutton could produce . 

  He had made it clear at Beechwood that he believed the paper had to be pop , pop , pop if it was going to sell a million . 

  And to do that it had to follow the successful formula of the present day , of which the leading exponent was the Sun . 

  Sutton's focus on the Sun , and on headlines like " GOTCHA ! " , was not just rivalry with its editor , Kelvin Mackenzie . 

  Sutton was looking at what the public bought today . 

  Not for him the good old days of the 1960s , when the Mirror -- social conscience and all -- reigned supreme and Pilger was churning out his hard-hitting reports . 

  People used to drive around in Austin A40s then . 

  Papers had changed as much as cars . 

  Nowadays this heavy investigative stuff was a liberal wank -- " concerned " middle-class people trying to raise up the working classes . 

  The way to make NoS popular was to put lots of people in it They could be used to bring home the sort of things which should be exposed and campaigned about in the paper -- like housing conditions , or unemployment . 

  And there was no reason why NoS could not be like the Sun and still talk to the left . 

  It just had to be upfront and radical . 

  The " Up Yours " mentality which people liked was nothing to do with politics or being right-wing . 

  The sort of rude things you got in Private Eye were not right-wing . 

  And his Ph. D . 

  studies of radical tracts had covered a period without any of today's party politics . 

  It was getting through to the readers on a human level that counted . 

  Sutton had recruited Bill Packford , who had worked with him on the Evening News in the old days , to lay out pages for the 7 December dummy edition . 

  Packford summed up a lot of the negative reaction to left-wing journalism . 

  He saw Sutton's interview dummy and was not impressed . 

  BLACKS UNDER THE LIQUID COSH and STRIP IN THE NAME OF THE LAW was not what he thought people wanted to read about on Sunday morning . 

  They did not want to be hit over the head like that , he concluded with his characteristic weary shrug . 

  Packford was an active member of his local Labour Party , sympathetic to the idea of the paper , and liked Keith . 

  He was , however , a hack , a dyed-in-the-wool Fleet Street man . 

  He knew what worked in popular national Sunday newspapers and what did not . 

  BLACKS UNDER THE LIQUID COSH did not . 

  Like Sutton , Packford had dropped out of papers as a career . 

  He had moved to Penzance in Cornwall , commuting to London for work . 

  The two had met up again when Packford helped on the Wapping Post . 

  But apart from that , he offered his skills to the highest bidder and would produce any type of paper to order . 

  He went round his customers , the publishers of trade magazines and in-house company newspapers , like an interior decorator with a book of samples . 

  He would show them examples of different sorts of pages and wait until they found one they liked . 

  " Make it look like that , " they would say , pointing to one of his sample pages , and that is what it would look like . 

  He had won an award for his Glaxo house magazine . 

  News on Sunday was more difficult than Packford's normal customers . 

  He had been amazed when Sutton rang to say he had become editor , especially as the British Telecom line had been so bad that he had misheard and thought Sutton had taken over at Today . 

  Though Packford was happy to experiment with all kinds of design , his work on the launch and re-launch of the Mail on Sunday had only confirmed the view that he and Sutton shared . 

  The Mail on Sunday had been launched with all sort of fancy design ideas . 

  It had immediately bombed and Sir David English , editor of the Daily Mail , had had to be brought in to rescue it by throwing out the new design ideas and making it look as old-fashioned as its daily counterpart . 

  Sales had picked up and the paper was now established . 

  It proved exactly what Sutton thought : whatever the intellectuals might think , the punters did not want designers mucking about with their newspapers . 

  Sutton and Packford both cut their teeth on the old hot-metal newspaper production process . 

  In those days newspapers were filthy , grubby things , often virtually illegible , with smudgy pictures and layers of black ink which got all over your hands . 

  New technology might have improved the print and production quality , but as far as Sutton was concerned nothing else had changed . 

  Designers were effete trendies from art college . 

  They might be all right for magazines or even upmarket newspapers , but they were useless on pops . 

  They charged you a fortune and left you with nothing but a hopelessly constricting grid . 

  The only bit they could cope with was designing a trendy logo . 

  But whereas Packford had adjusted to the age of new technology and the design possibilities it offered , Sutton remained wedded , at heart , to the old hot-metal approach . 

  Hot-metal men knew how pop papers were really composed . 

  Instead of being " designed " , the mishmash of typefaces , type sizes , screaming headlines , jumbled-up articles and unrelated snippets came from an organic process . 

  To the unpractised eye it might appear a hotch-potch thrown together at random . 

  But really it was a skilled , even magical , craft , evolved over two hundred years . 

  Papers looked like this because the ones that did not went bust . 

  Pages were put together by gathering the material up and roughing it into a layout based round the principal hooks -- the headlines and pictures which were the only things that really mattered . 

  It was a fast , intuitive process . 

  The object was to pack together the secrets of the trade -- WOBs , NIBs , blobs , bullets , underscores and overscores , starbursts , barkers , screamers , gobbit-boxes , straps , rag-outs , bastard measures and cross-heads . 

  Anything that would grab the eye was jammed together to make the page frantically busy . 

  The words of stories were secondary . 

  Power over those was delegated to the sub-editors . 

  The reporters tipped in roughish copy which the subs could slash to fit the allocated spaces . 

  This was to be the formula for News on Sunday . 

  After all , it was not a coffee-table production for the middle classes . 

  It was a pop paper , not the Bayeux Tapestry . 

  Ten years ago you would have wrapped your chips in it . 

  As for the committed audience , they would have to live with it . 

  They were in the bag anyhow . 

  Sutton thought getting them was " a piece of piss " . 

  Still high on the Wapping Post , he told Packford it was worth giving News on Sunday a chance . 

  Sutton was later going to have to cope with marrying up this formula to the new direct-entry computer system , which was being sorted out by systems editor Eugenie Verney , a sub-editor made redundant from the Daily Express in Manchester , who had previously worked on the Guardian . 

  She had already fallen out with Sutton , who regarded computers with unconcealed loathing . 

  His lack of new-technology experience had been ignored by Pilger and the others when they chose him for his production skills . 

  For the moment , anyway , he was using the old methods on the 7 December dummy . 

  It did not work out very well . 

  He and Packford had to work under appallingly difficult circumstances , with a skeleton staff and a jobbing printer who had never done anything like it before , and the actual paper was printed on cheap newsprint . 

  But it was still unmistakably mediocre . 

  Under the strapline of " The People's Paper " there were thirty-two pages . 

  The front page , headed uninspiringly WAS THE PRIME MINISTER A SPY ? was a good story , an early revelation from Peter Wright's book Spycatcher . 

  There was more heavyweight material with a double-page investigation into the mystery plane crash which killed President Samora Machel of Mozambique . 

  A black-and-white " Life on Sunday " section in the middle carried an illustrated feature advising women how to feel themselves for signs of breast cancer . 

  A section called " Relax " covered entertainment and television with features on Lenny Henry , Batman and Boy George . 

  There were eight sports pages and the football results . 

  The glossy colour section was entitled " More on Sunday " and immediately truncated to " Moron Sunday " by Sutton's critics . 

  But it was the news pages that had really gone off the rails . 

  They were hopelessly bitty , and the real mistake was on page 3 , with a hopeless attempt at humour in a picture story headlined THE POPE'S HOROSCOPE . 

  There was a large picture of the Pope in tarmac-kissing mode and the story of how the paper had entered his birthdate on the British Telecom horoscope service . 

  For good measure the piece whined about the cost of the call . 

  Behind the scenes Pilger , still fuming from the Kennedy Hotel showdown , was working separately . 

  He did not think people wanted harmless fun on Sunday . 

  They were desperately keen for information . 

  Under his leadership , the heavyweight investigative team was to produce reports which were a cross between the old Sunday Times Insight team and the occasional " Shock Issues " which are all that remains of the old Mirror . 

  These would hit the popular audience -- the old-style Mirror readers who wrote in bemoaning the trivialization of their paper . 

  Pilger had kept a lot of these letters , which had moved him deeply . 

  His experiences in covering the miners' strike had reinforced his conviction that people were begging for his sort of paper . 

  Pilger was not at all convinced that the NoS sales target was viable , but it was not his job to worry about that . 

  He believed that if the paper made a big enough impact and was raved about by the industry , there would be a rush to save it even if it did not sell enough to make a profit . 

  Some sort of re-financing package could be organized . 

  And even if it went down , at least it would be a heroic failure -- a genuine attempt to break the mould and bring back standards of quality and decency . 

  And it would not just be decent in its coverage -- it would look decent . 

  It would be a quality product and not ashamed of it . 

  It was the least the people whose letters he kept and treasured deserved . 

  So while Sutton had been frantically interviewing and trying to cope with real stories , Pilger had been to the Regent Street studio of Carrol , Dempsey and Thirkell , designers of the two-month-old Independent , described by the middle classes hoping for better papers as " a good deed in a naughty world " . 

  Working with Thirkell , Pilger had drawn up sample pages of a new design , using gobbledegook text except for the headlines . 

  The front-page splash was an old Pilger chestnut -- the latest of a series of articles which he periodically wrote based on the diaries of a seven-year-old Asian girl in the East End in which she faithfully recorded racist attacks on the family . 

  The result was quite unlike any current national paper in Britain . 

  The front page was a picture of the Asian girl below a long headline in lower-case type . 

  The typeface was clean and simple . 

  The inside pages used classic 1970s magazine design . 

  Pictures and illustrations were used big , and the wide column layout packed a lot of words on the page . 

  The layout was powerful and grabbed your attention . 

  Each page concentrated on one article . 

  Unlike the Sutton formula there were no hooks to send your eye skittering round the page . 

  You went straight in . 

  Overall it was crisp , tight , and committed . 

  You either loved it or hated it . 

  It was a designer newspaper -- its nearest equivalents the trendy but established continental papers such as Libration in France . 

  There was one unfortunate mistake . 

  " Siege " , in the front-page headline , had been misspelt as " seige " , which caused Pilger opponents to fire back the " Moron Sunday " jibe with racist jokes about stupid Ozzies who could not even spell . 

  Now the two rival versions had been completed , it was time for the multiple power centres of News on Sunday to deliver their verdicts . 

  The chosen day was 16 December , when there were meetings at GLEB's offices to discuss Sutton's dummy . 

  Sutton knew it was not that good , but he was not prepared for what came next . 

  The day started with a meeting of the London staff . 

  They had no particular reason to like Sutton . 

  The ones who had worked on the previous Hayling dummy , including photographer Tom Picton and his daughter Zoe , had good reason to fear that Sutton , given a free hand , would get rid of them . 

  The journalists who had been hired by him were based in Manchester . 

  The administrators and Walsh's marketing department minions , who had been invited in to criticize as well , were suspicious of " outsiders " like Sutton anyway . 

  But there was an emotional element as well . 

  They had been shocked by the dummy , which they thought far worse than the Hayling one . 

  But because many of them knew little about journalism , they did not appreciate the difference . 

  Hayling's dummy had been a marathon performance over months , whilst Sutton had had only a short time and few people . 

  When the London staff , gathered round specially for the occasion , began to deliver their verdict and the litany began to roll , Sutton was staggered by their ferocity . 

  Some were veterans of News on Sunday's many faction fights but now , for once , they stopped ganging up on each other and ganged up on Sutton . 

  The paper had no stories in it , they said . 

  It bore no relation to the Charter , it was not irreverent and anti-establishment , the pictures were not strong enough , it did not have enough on ethnicity or women , it was not exciting , different , political or inspirational . 

  And another thing -- it had no humanity . 

  Someone said it was the worst paper they had ever seen . 

  Sutton was goaded about his statements that he would bring " real people " into the paper . 

  Instead they'd got the Pope and an article about a highly paid journalist , Simon Winchester , eating a dog for dinner . 

  They did not even like the editorial , which had been written by Packford on half a bottle of Scotch . 

  On and on it went . 

  Each new speaker had a separate catalogue of complaints . 

  Sutton was devastated . 

  There he was , just off the picket line , where he knew people had loved the Wapping Post . 

  They had queued up for it , even if the committee people had worried about it . 

  A copy had been auctioned on the spot for 35 . 

  Now he was trying to get something done in this nightmare , and this was all the thanks he got . 

  Becoming editor had been the greatest day of his life , and now these people were telling him that his paper was apolitical and had a lack of analysis and editorialization . 

  Though his critics maintain they were trying to be constructive and wanted him to stay , Sutton was convinced that the criticism had been organized in advance as a warning that if he did not go , as Pilger was demanding , they would make life hell for him . 

  It was like a kangaroo court , he thought . 

  No , he decided , it was worse -- a lynching party . 

  Then came the coup de grce . 

  Pilger raised a copy of Sutton's paper disparagingly above his head , and solemnly pronounced : " This is a travesty of journalism . " 

  He produced from his briefcase his own alternative , Thirkell-designed sample pages , beautifully printed on glistening white bromide paper . 

  Next it was the turn of the Founders . 

  Their meeting was a grade up from the mob justice represented by the staff . 

  The Founders at least had the semblance of a court . 

  But they were no more complimentary , and complained bitterly that the paper was devoid of politics . 

  Sutton was allowed to say his piece . 

  He blamed chaotic production arrangements , lack of time , people and resources . 

  He did not think much of his dummy himself . 

  And Hayling had told him to tone down the politics to smooth away advertisers' fears that it was going to be a Commie rag . 

  They had seen his passion and anger at Beechwood . 

  It would come out later , along with the politics . 

  Sutton pleaded with them to have confidence in him . 

  Pilger had been giving him a hard time . 

  " I've been living in fear , undermined over the past few weeks , " he moaned . 

  Pilger was called in , and he summarized his position . 

  He blithely asserted that Sutton's dummy " said it all " . 

  It was a paper devoid of politics and did not represent any of the spirit they had thought of and encapsulated in the Charter . 

  The last one , done by Hayling with his advice , had been far better . 

  They all knew what he thought should be done ; the Founders were on a " disaster course " if they fudged it . 

  The earlier staff meeting had shown that journalists would not work under Sutton . 

  He sympathized with one of the Founders who had said that there must be " no blood on the floor " , but blood was now clearly necessary . 

  NoS had not been hijacked -- that was too strong a word . 

  But they had all made a serious error , himself included . 

  And now Sutton had formed a coterie of cronies round him and was appointing the wrong staff , which had to be stopped at once . 

  All applications for jobs had to be routed through Pilger . 

  " I cannot do any more , " he concluded . 

  He wanted Sutton sacked that very day . 

  Hayling would take over as managing editor until somebody else could be found -- he'd done well enough on last year's dummy . 

  Pilger himself would remain editor in chief as agreed . 

  There was a skirmish at this point . 

  The Founders had been suspicious of Pilger for wanting too much power long before Sutton was appointed . 

  They had offered him the position of editor in chief with , apparently , more direct control over the content of the paper , but only if he came off the Board . 

  Pilger had agreed but had apparently not realized how this weakened his position . 

  The Founders now told Pilger that the role they had given him was something less than total editorial control . 

  Pilger was furious . 

  He hated the intricacies of the NoS management system . 

  He replied that without total control he did not have a job . 

  They'd better make their minds up quickly whether he was in charge or not . 

  He'd got other things to do if they did not want him on his terms . 

  Pilger left the room and the Founders mulled it over . 

  It was quite a dilemma . 

  Sutton's dummy was awful . 

  They did not trust either of them , but if either left there would be trouble . 

  If they sacked Sutton now it would be seen as a victory for Pilger and agreement to his total control over the paper . 

  They would be rendered powerless -- there was no way they could do anything with him . 

  But if they backed Sutton at least they stood a chance of controlling him -- even if he had turned out to be , as some thought , a bit of a duffer . 

  After this Sutton was spared what he had thought was going to be his third inquisition of the day , the Board meeting . 

  The result was a foregone conclusion . 

  As Pilger waited outside he was passed a note telling him Sutton was to stay . 

  He still went in and showed his pages . 

  Steve Riley , one of the Founders' representatives on the Board , asked him to stay . 

  If he had to go , he should go quietly and give continued moral support to the paper . 

  Though he got some support from Board members Hilary Wainwright and Vella Pillay of the Bank of China ( who changed his mind and agreed that Sutton had to go as soon as he saw Pilger's pages ) , there was no real point . 

  Pilger was disgusted by what he saw as a load of hand-wringing , indecisive amateurs . 

  Their main worries seemed to be not the paper , but bad publicity and the left being seen fighting amongst itself . 

  Bitterly disappointed , he later complained he felt like a Spanish general without a horse . 

  He was the principal architect of the paper's style and the only journalist involved with the original Founders . 

  Three months previously he had been invested with " overall editorial control " . 

  Yet now he had no editorial powers at all . 

  The committees , which he saw as " aspiring to mediocrity " , had betrayed him . 

  He walked out and never came back . 

  Two days later the Founders , Board and management team met together to discuss the crisis . 

  They took the NoS way out by setting up another committee -- the product development committee -- to keep Sutton in line . 

  This was to be headed by Hayling , who became the " new Pilger " in the position of editorial director , to which he was appointed in the New Year . 

  Hayling's place as chief executive was taken by Gerry Taylor , who had been hired as the paper's advertising consultant . 

  Two days before Christmas Hayling circulated a memo to the staff . 

  " The trauma is now over " , he wrote . 

  Many of them were now much clearer about the paper , and he explained the latest changes in management structure . 

  He wished them all a peaceful Christmas break . 

  " We certainly deserve it " , he concluded . 

  A desperate last memo from the London office manager , Anne Diamond , promised that the Christmas party , which had degenerated into a drink in the wine bar opposite GLEB , would now be held in January . 

  SOUTH AFRICA 1995 ... ? 

  contents 

  Should it be South Africa 1995 ... ? 

  Mick Cleary argues that claims for the 1995 RWC are not as persuasive as at first they may seem 

  Best ... on borrowed time ? 

  - ENGLAND -- Richard Bath uncovers England coach Dick Best's short contract - Beaumont at Large 

  Big Al gives it a bash ! 

  - SCOTLAND -- Bill McLaren talks to Alan Watt , lock turned tighthead prop - Scottish Notes with Bill McMurtrie 

  Captain Scarlet 

  - WALES -- Steve Bale analyses Llanelli coach Gareth Jenkins 

  - Down the line with Phil Bennett 

  Hamilton goes for it ! 

  - IRELAND -- Sean Diffley meets flanker Gordon Hamilton 

  - Irish Report with Sean Diffley 

  Top Scorers 

  - BRITISH ISLES -- Peter Jackson spotlights Saints' John Steele 

  Clubs of the Month 

  Clifton and Tynedale win the plaques 

  What Eddie Butler Saw 

  British clubs keep the RWC pot boiling 

  100,000 Hail Aussie Aces 

  Greg Campbell revels in the Sydney tickertape parade 

  World Cup 1991 Souvenir 

  The ONLY complete record -- 350 pages in embossed binder 

  Anglophobia -- fact or fiction ? 

  - FRANCE -- Chris Thau argues that it's a fact 

  Books of the Year 

  Stephen Jones reviews a bumper crop for this Christmas 

  Missing " Link " makes good 

  - AUSTRALIA -- Greg Campbell sees Ewen McKenzie as skipper 

  Bouquet of Barbed Wire 

  - NEW ZEALAND -- Don Cameron sifts through the ashes 

  Birtwell's Happy Band 

  - CANADA -- Peter McMullan talks to coach Ian Birtwell 

  Blowing the Big Chance 

  - USA -- Randall Liebermann blasts World Cup TV exposure 

  The Case for the Defence 

  - SOUTH AFRICA -- John Robbie is sure of Springbok strength 

  Around the World 

  - BERMUDA -- The Classic is socially serious - HONG KONG -- Alvin Sallay reports on scuppered Springboks - International Crossroads - DUBAI -- Queensland to hot to handle 

  CONTENTS END 

  Should South Africa host the next World Cup ? 

  On the surface it's very attractive ; superb stadia , an advanced infrastructure and a rugby culture second to none . 

  But can the game afford to hold its showpiece in an unstable country where sport is a political football ? 

  On The Air ... 

  with NIGEL STARMER-SMITH 

  A majority sport in the making 

  So 46 per cent of all adult males in the ABC1 socio-economic grouping in the South-West of England watched the Rugby World Cup Final ! 34 per cent in Scotland , 40 per cent in Wales -- and across the whole ITV network the average figure was 27 per cent of ABC1 men . 

  By comparison , the Soccer World Cup Final of Italia'90 reached 11 per cent of ABC men on ITV and 31 per cent of ABC men on BBC1 . 

  In overall terms audience delivery , to quote a respected analyst , was probably ahead of most initial forecasts with , predictably , ABC1 men outperforming all the demographic groups . 

  Compared to the Soccer World Cup the rugby appealed to the ABC1 and younger elements to a greater degree . 

  Although the total viewing audiences were significantly less than that achieved by association football , this , it is suggested , is partially to be explained by the differences in transmission times , for , unlike the soccer event , no " significant " matches were played during the peak television viewing times of the day . 

  England v New Zealand on a Thursday afternoon was never going to grab the world's biggest television viewership ! 

  But even during non-peak viewing hours , and even for matches that did not involve the Home Unions , the figures for rugby are impressive enough . 

  Just consider the additional impact that might have come from more popular scheduled kick-off times ( floodlit games all round ? ) when , again in ABC1 men ratings , New Zealand v Italy " scored " 11 per cent , Wales v Argentine 16 per cent , France v Canada 11 per cent , New Zealand v Canada 13 per cent and Australia v New Zealand 16 per cent . 

  It is high time we ceased to allow people to talk about rugby union as a minority sport -- even a post-World Cup modest club match on Rugby Special rated two million viewers . 

  The 1991 World Cup generated unprecedented interest in rugby union and planted the sport firmly in the top league of spectator sports . 

  May the " sales and recruitment " campaign amongst the clubs continue at full throttle -- especially amongst the junior age groups , who voted with their TV " on " switches that rugby is the game they like best . 

  Now let us get them with the playing kit on ! 

  No time for respite , as , with the World Cup scarcely out of the way ( ticker-tape celebrations Down Under and all ) , thoughts turn to 1995 ( and , in this issue , South Africa the hosts -- " yes " or " no " ! ) and , more immediately , the start of a new International Championship . 

  How fortunate we are -- uniquely -- to have this hardy annual event reappearing with each New Year . 

  The Five Nations Championship is understandably the envy of the rest of the rugby world and what spice will be added to the coming encounters -- notably when England travel once more to Murrayfield on the opening day and return to Paris in February ; when Ireland , so nearly conquerors of champions Australia , run out once more at Lansdowne Road , and Wales begin their brave attempt to rise like some Phoenix from the ashes . 

  The excitement beckons -- and I shall go no further at this stage than to wonder whether the Championship record of exactly 100 years ago might be repeated in 1992 , when England beat Ireland , Wales and Scotland ( just ! ) , 

  Scotland beat Wales and Ireland ( just ! ) and Ireland beat Wales . 

  France were not part of the tournament in 1892 , and 100 years later I would be reluctant to predict precisely what their impact will be this time round , Villepreux or no ! 

  Finally , at a sad time for Rosamund and myself , our sincerest thanks to so many rugby friends who have extended , through kind words and deeds , their sympathies to us on the tragic death , after a short illness , of our daughter Charlotte . 

  May 1992 be a year of peace and happiness for all . 

  LETTERS 

  LITRE LETTER ! 

  One law for the rich ... 

  FOLLOWING the excitement of the well-run World Cup , certain observations force themselves upon me . 

  Firstly , we should look back to see how things could be improved . 

  Secondly , and most importantly , the quality of the refereeing should be examined . 

  Regrettably , it seems to some of us that a large proportion of the World Cup referees " chickened out " of difficult and contentious decisions when they involved more powerful and vocal countries , but did not hesitate to punish the lesser countries e. g. Calder's butt and the Argentina v W. Samoa punch-up . 

  The former was a very serious act of foul play and the latter of no importance in a well-controlled game . 

  It is high time the variable quality of international referees and the anomalies that abound in interpretation were sorted out by an International Board Survey . 

  In addition , this criticism of referees could be extended to their manifest reluctance to referee the line-outs in a fair proportion of the games . 

  This also refers to the touch judges . 

  Penalty tries appear frequently in divisional games , usually for repeated collapsing of the scrum on the defence try-line . 

  None in the World Cup . 

  This suggests to some of us that ( a ) the quality of the referees is poor ( b ) there is a rugby law for the rich ( internationals and World Cup ) and another for the poor ( divisional games ) . 

  Loyal Norling praised the refereeing of the games ; but from where I was sitting in most of the games an unfit Norling with his flair and two good touch judges would have been preferable to most of the referees I saw . 

  Rugby was the winner 

  NOW that the World Cup is over and we are back to the league games again , I think that all rugby supporters who were able to go to the matches or to watch it on television must admit that rugby was the winner . 

  Australia were worthy champions and English fans must not be downhearted even though we lost . 

  England played some of their best rugby for a long time . 

  And let us not forget Western Samoa , Canada and Italy -- with the last two really giving the All Blacks a fright -- and Ireland , who were so near to bringing off a great quarter-final victory . 

  Let us hope that the Five Nations Championship games show us that all the Home Nations are also capable of good and fair rugby . 

  The idea of increasing the value of a try to five points is one I do not think should be accepted . 

  If the drop goal were reduced to two points and the penalty goal to two points , that would be more sensible . 

  I would also like the team awarded a penalty and gaining ground to be given the line-out throw-in . 

  Also , do not allow a player to make the ball dead behind his own goal-line unless he is being tackled ; a player making the ball dead when there is no player within 10 years of him should have to take a drop-out from under the posts . 

  Scotland's death march 

  MY heart goes out to all Scotsmen and women , who watched the World Cup Third-Place Play-off at Cardiff . 

  I thought Welsh rugby was slow , but the band's rendition of Flower of Scotland was more like a death march . 

  You could see the pain and anger on the faces of the players . 

  Did the Welsh have no faith in Scotland at all ? 

  I honestly thought they were going to win . 

  As the English wife of a Scot , we all join in with the singing , except when they play England -- even our little girls , aged 4 and 2 years . 

  Let us hope someone buys some batteries for the bandsmen before the Five Nations match next March . 

  " Disgusting display " 

  HAVING watched almost every game in the World Cup , firstly in my Irish colours , and then in my Scottish colours ( although I live in Dublin , my mother was Scottish ! ) 

  I am sorry to have to say " shame on you Finlay Calder " for two disgraceful incidents , and " shame on you , Scottish rugby powers that be " , for taking no disciplinary action against him . 

  Can it be that you condone his actions ? 

  It certainly was a disgusting display from a man who has bowed out from the game very publicly . 

  When he found the game too fast for him , he resorted to " thuggery " ! 

  Had the head-butting incident ( in the game against New Zealand ) taken place in Princes Street , he would probably have been arrested . 

  Tall poppy syndrome 

  ON Thursday 31st October , two days before the World Cup final , it was with dismay that I read one of my schoolboy heroes , David Duckham , being reported as commenting that he would be " embarrassed and very sad if England won the Cup playing the way they did against Scots " . 

  When great ex-players join the media bandwagon of knocking successful teams one cannot help feeling there may be a tinge of jealousy in their comments . 

  If the English performances in Paris and Edinburgh had been executed by New Zealand they would be proclaimed as awesome and unstoppable . 

  In contrast , England were branded dull and boring . 

  The players and coaches should be immensely proud of themselves for their performances . 

  Any sport is about playing to your strengths and playing on your opponents' weaknesses . 

  This England did superbly and came out on top . 

  They should have to make no apology for that . 

  Despite the outcome of the final , my message to Will and the boys is thanks for the memories ; for me they will live forever , and I will have great pleasure in years to come to say " I was there " , not " I was embarrassed " . 

  No glory in defeat 

  THE Australians must be laughing all the way back to Sydney at the thought of the World Cup Final . 

  Who wants to come second ? 

  New Zealand , Australia and Scotland for that matter would never settle for second just to please a fickle press . 

  Why are England expected to settle for it and be happy with a " well done " and a pat on the back then the next day be criticised by the same pressmen for not catching the ball at vital moments ! 

  The British press always knock British winners in any sport , so why listen to them ? 

  Winning the World Cup was more important to real English rugby supporters than anything . 

  It was wrong to change a winning formula during the most important rugby game ever played . 

  We all know that England can play an expansive game ; they proved this in the 89/ 90 season ( and again came second ) . 

  Who wants glory in defeat ? 

  You play to win or you shall always come second . 

  I , for one , would have settled for a 3-0 victory . 

  That would have been glory enough for me . 

  A World Cup final is the wrong time and place to prove a point and the English management must take the blame for letting the press and the Australians sucker them into self destruction . 

  Is it not ironic that Australia won the final playing in exactly the same style that England were so slated for -- to win ! 

  ITV's moving obstacle 

  AS has been pointed out in your magazine , the ITV coverage of the World Cup was very good , although promises that the BBC would be totally outshone did not really come to much . 

  However , I still have a little complaint to make . 

  I went to Cardiff to watch the Third-place Play-off between Scotland and the All Blacks and stood in the West Enclosure . 

  We even arrived at the ground nice and early to be assured of the prestigious place leaning against the fence at the front . 

  All went well until the match started and the cameraman arrived . 

  For the rest of the match he proceeded to annoy me and my fellow spectators by positioning himself right between us and the action . 

  It was really uncanny the way he did it all the time . 

  Being right in line with the posts we had expected some sort of obstacle to look round but not a moving one ! 

  This problem must also have been worse for some people because , even though I am only 16 , I am 5ft 8ins . 

  So the smaller children in the crowd must have had awful problems . 

  I appreciate that the television companies have to get the best shots of the game or we'd complain about that , but I think they should bear in mind those people who have paid to see the game and , in some cases like mine , travelled a long way to see the match . 

  South Africa set fair 

  TWO letters by readers carried in the November 1991 issue of RW&amp;amp;P prompt me to send you my views on what must be the most important issues facing the IRB and future Rugby World Cup tournaments . 

  First , take the point made by Mr. Holloway from Germany , who says that South Africa ( they should have been granted a dispensation and welcomed to World Cup 1991 ) must surely go through the full qualifying process for 1995 . 

  This gentleman has said a mouthful and God bless his soul . 

  The absence of South Africa from both the 1987 and this year's tournaments stood out like a sore thumb . 

  True , Namibia was not a country when the 1991 World Cup preliminaries were held in Africa , but look at the challenge from Africa in the form of Zimbabwe . 

  Japan's devastation of a country which had lost to Namibia on the eve of the World Cup was noting less than a scandal and a disgrace to international rugby . 

  And I hope RW&amp;amp;P will be able to throw some light on the absence of Kenya in the qualifying African Zone set-up . 

  I saw them play in Hong Kong some years ago and they looked a jolly good side . 

  Zimbabwe's divorce from the Currie Cup Competition has contributed to the sad state of its rugby . 

  ( The true picture was unfortunately not told to RW&amp;amp;P readers by the much-travelled Chris Thau in one of his recent reports . 

  Over to you , Robert Mugabe ) . 

  Without that South African link , Zimbabwe's rugby , and even that of Namibia , should they shun their former " ruler " for long , would only drag itself into the doldrums . 

  I believe the world cricket authorities have got their act right by bringing in South Africa into the World Cup at virtually the eleventh hour and the IRB should not be stuck in the mud . 

  South Africa should be given the 1995 World Cup without batting an eyelid . 

  The other aspect of the 1991 World Cup that certainly caught the TV watcher's eye was the inconsistency among the referees . 

  They appeared to have one law for the big boys and another for the minnows . 

  Jim Fleming sends off a Western Samoan and an Argentine while Finlay Calder's head-butting went ignored and so did some of the forwards from France against Canada . 

  Ed Morrison allowed John Jeffrey to come in from an offside position and " collect " a passing movement between two Japanese players while Hayashi was tackled without the ball when a try seemed certain for Japan . 

  All these setbacks did not matter , old chap , because the referee only has eyes for the big boys . 

  One does not hope to see Les Peard around in the same way as the name of Winston Jones vanished after he handed Scotland their 1984 Grand Slam on a plate , aided and abetted by the British press and its tirade against French forward play . 

  The headhunter ? 

  I HAVE just read the November issue of RW&amp;amp;P and feel that I must write and comment on Wayne Shelford's article . 

  Whilst I agree with many of Mr. Shelford's comments I find it hard to believe his comment on high tackles . 

  This World Cup has been a showcase for the game both in this country and world-wide . 

  Many people are expressing an interest in playing the game and no doubt many parents will be interested in mini-rugby for their children . 

  Then Mr. Shelford makes his pathetic statement on referees clamping down on the high tackle . 

  So , the high tackle is the action of real men ? 

  What rubbish ! 

  It is the action of a player too limited in skill or sense to do anything else . 

  It is far tougher to dive at the legs of an oncoming player than to haul them down by the neck or straight-arm tackle them as they run past you . 

  How can we attract players to the sport if a top class player is advocating potentially dangerous play ? 

  Perhaps Mr. Shelford should speak to some of the players in our sport who have been seriously injured by high tackles and then see how tough he feels ? 

  I trust that Mr. Shelford's comments are not those held by the staff of RW&amp;amp;P or in future issues can we look forward to " Wayne's Top 10 maiming tips for mini's " or " Eye gouging and ear biting for beginners " . 

  I have played rugby for several years at various levels . 

  Obviously I have not played at any level anywhere near that of Wayne Shelford , but I feel that the sport is quite tough enough without making it downright dangerous ! 

  Cynical Campese 

  WE WILL never know if Campese , Farr-Jones et al were right : whether the cover would have reached Rory Underwood before he reached the line . 

  Off the field , Cup in hand , perhaps the end justified the means ? 

  Campese dismissed the matter , but when he chose to put less confidence in the cover on the field and deliberately knocked down Peter Winterbottom's pass , Bevan should have taken that as an admission that the so-far impregnable " Gold Wall " was about to be breached . 

  Campese's decision robbed 60,000 in the stadium , and countless millions around the world , of what would have been one of the most intense and fascinating finales to the World Cup , with England only three points behind , their heads up and winning score in sight . 

  Would Underwood have scored ? 

  Who knows ? 

  But this was surely one occasion that , for the good of the game , the benefit of the doubt must surely have been given to England , regardless of the word of the law . 

  A penalty try would not have given the World Cup to England in itself as they still had to score again . 

  But , for all that effort and the manner in which they attacked from the kick-off , I believe they deserved that try . 

  As it was , however , as in the Soccer World Cup of 1984 , the hand of a legend brought England's World Cup dreams to an end . 

  The press-gang in its place 

  WHILST much has been said about the abilities of the players , the coaches , the referees , the managers etc , little has been said about the standards of journalism . 

  My belief is that sports journalism is there to inform and , most importantly , to stimulate debate . 

  The purpose of my writing is to say how refreshing it was to read Nigel Starmer-Smith's well-balanced view on Wales' performance in his November " On the Air " column . 

  You were right , Nigel , to say that there are talented individuals not yet part of a team -- and you were right to say that Western Samoa are a bit useful . 

  So much of the national press seem to have lost their hold on what is real and what is not . 

  Michael Calvin wrote : " Cardiff Arms Park is as much a relic of former glory as the pithead wheel of an old mine " ! 

  In reality Cardiff Arms Park is one of the top three sporting venues in the UK -- a super place to watch sport -- and sport is what it is . 

  Did Manchester United's relegation to Division Two , England's failure to qualify for the Argentina Soccer World Cup , Australia's mid-70s cricket XI , see the demise of their sport ? 

  No . 

  Sport is cyclical . 

  The Welsh have had the number of quality players from which to choose diminished by rugby league . 

  So their performances in the short term will reflect that . 

  Exceptional victories by the youth XV , the U19s and U21s in recent times will be reflected in the long term . 

  Then , as Starmer-Smith so rightly said , " Wales will bounce back " . 

  The rugby public is generally a knowledgeable one . 

  It needs sensible , thoughtful journalism , not the crass sensationalism adopted by the dailies and Sundays ( even the " quality " ones ) . 

  I am glad your article belongs to the former . 

  Play it again , Sam ! 

  THANKS TO RW&amp;amp;P the World Cup will have to be played all over again . 

  I assume that will be the organisers' decision having seen the picture on the front of the November edition . 

  This clearly shows Kirwan holding on to Webb long after the scoring pass was given to Jones . 

  If this obstruction , obviously intended to stop Webb playing any further part in stopping the move , had been noticed , the try would have been disallowed , the game drawn and England would have played Canada and so on . 

  Or maybe , rather than a total replay , just award the Cup to England due to Campese's blatant obstruction on Underwood just as he was about to tackle Horan . 

  No run down the line , no line-out , no Cup . 

  Nick Cain's ROUNDABOUT 

  Praise the Board 

  THE members of the IRB deserve praise for at last grasping the nettle where the laws are concerned . 

  After the World Cup they rose to the occasion and agreed on proposals which , when adopted next year , will fundamentally change the structure of the game . 

  For the second time since the 19th century the value of the try has been changed and for the second time this century the drop goal value has been altered . 

  The try is to be worth five points while the drop goal will count for two points . 

  In general the law changes look like long overdue positive steps which strike the delicate balance of encouraging attacking enterprise while also punishing sides intent on killing the ball in defence . 

  The prohibition of the anti-game scrum-half dummy from the base of the scrum is also to be applauded , while the crooked allowance on quick line-out throws before a line-out has formed will certainly encourage rapid counter-attacks . 

  Write in and let us know what you think about the new law changes -- we will be looking at them in greater detail in next month's issue . 

  Dragons are coming 

  THOSE Welsh fathers whose sons hero worship Emyr Lewis and Robert Jones rather than Ian Rush and Mark Hughes could be in for a nasty shock next Christmas when they discover the Welsh rugby kit they bought this year may well be out of date . 

  That , at least , is one implication of the WRU's five year 1.25m deal with kit manufacturers Cotton Traders . 

  Not only that , but that team playing at Cardiff Arms Park and wearing red shirts with green collars and redesigned feathers emblem will now be called the Dragons ( and will have the dragon emblem on the right arm ) . 

  The contract allows for a change in kit design within the next five years . 

  Says WRU marketing director Jonathan Price : " Young people identify strongly with teams that have attractive character names and playing strips " . 

  Charlotte Starmer-Smith 

  ALTHOUGH the circumstances have been so sad , the staff of the magazine have been reminded recently how much the rugby community will rally around when one of its members suffers a loss . 

  Nigel and Rosamund Starmer-Smith's tragic loss of their daughter , Charlotte , has clearly affected many of you as deeply as it has us . 

  Hundreds were able to pay their respects and express their condolences by turning up at a charity rugby match at Shiplake College , Berkshire , in aid of the Charlotte Starmer-Smith Memorial Fund which aims to purchase medical equipment for the treatment of blood diseases . 

  If you did not , though , and wish to make a donation , then please do so to : Charlotte Starmer-Smith Medical Fund , . 

  Spitting image 

  A LATE penalty against a local team in the French Championship is not for faint-of-heart referees . 

  The current anti-British hysteria in France made matters worse because it was awarded by a Scot by the name of Ian Goodall . 

  Goodall had been invited to referee the First Division game between Tarbes and Brive . 

  His penalty against Tarbes in the last minutes of the game levelled the score 18-18 . 

  The home crowd was not pleased and hooligans ( described by French journalist Jacques Verdier as " imbciles " ) spat on the Scotsman as he left the field . 

  " In France the local side is expected to win , hence the intensity of the reaction " , said Goodall . 

  He needed a police escort when he left the stadium . 

  Men of the moment 

  THE World Cup may be well over , but there's no forgetting some of the performances we saw in October 1991 . 

  The Famous Grouse Awards at the Caf Royal , London , paid tribute to some of the greater moments in the competition , handing out awards for the most notable feats . 

  Picture on the left are prizewinners ( left to right ) : 

  WORLD CUP ISSUE RECORD 65,000 SALE 

  Rugby World &amp;amp; Post hit a new peak with a record 65,000 sale of the October World Cup preview issue . 

  This eclipsed the previous best sale achieved by the magazine with the Wales Centenary issue of October 1980 by some 23,000 . 

  Thanks to all you readers out there for helping us to reach this target during a recession which has hammered the magazine trade as hard as any . 

  We have done our utmost to provide you with the best possible product but if you have any complaints or suggestions as to how it could be improved do not hesitate to let us know . 

  Season's Greetings -- and do not forget your subscription ! 

  From the heart 

  ALTHOUGH John Kirwan might be in a honeymoon mood at the moment after the whole All Black team turned up at his recent marriage in Italy ( see pages 54 and 65 ) , his good humour is unlikely to last too long if the NZRFU meeting on December 12 and 13th decides to take action against him over his public announcement that he would not make himself available for the All Blacks if Auckland coach John Hart is not Grizz Wyllie's successor as national coach . 

  The ultimate expression of player power has not gone down too well back in New Zealand , where the NZRFU chief executive George Verry said : " I cannot recall a precedent for such comments , but I am sure the rules have provisions for dealing with players who bring the game into disrepute " . 

  Ominous stuff . 

  If Kirwan is serious -- and hooker Sean Fitzpatrick assures us he is -- then it is possible that he will not wear the silver fern again because , even though Alex Wyllie is no longer in contention , there's no guarantee that Hart will get the job . 

  North Harbour's Peter Thorburn , Otago's Laurie Mains , and Wellington's Earle Kirton are also in the running , as are Andy Leslie , Ross Cooper and Graham Hamer . 

  All Black wing John Kirwan strides down the aisle in Treviso , Italy , with his new wife , Fiorela Tomasi , an international volleyball player . 

  Rutherford's reply 

  AS ENGLAND start to look towards fashioning a team that can win the next World Cup , the RFU have appointed a new coach Dick Best only until the end of the season . 

  That raises the question of whether or not that gives him the sort of " job security " necessary to experiment with the new players coming through in the hope of building a side capable of beating All Blacks , Wallabies and Springboks . 

  But RFU Technical Director Don Rutherford assures RW&amp;amp;P that this just is not so . 

  " Everyone's appointed on an annual basis . 

  Even though Geoff Cooke was appointed through to the World Cup , his was only a yearly " contract " , and his position was reviewed by the RFU each year . 

  There's nothing at all sinister in that . 

  " Whether or not you are invited to stay on has nothing to do with results , it's the performances that matter . 

  What we're interested in is how Dick ( Best ) can blend in those new players who will start to come through this year " . 

  Bath plug 

  CONGRATULATIONS to our new Assistant Editor Richard Bath , who ( thanks to a large slice of beginner's luck ! ) kept a clean sheet in his World Cup predictions in the October preview issue . 

  This feat could have earned him 6,000 from the bookies if he had put his money where his mouth was . 

  As it is , Richard , previously the Rugby Correspondent of the Western Daily Press in Bristol , has had to make do with a bottle of Glenfiddich ... 

  Still going strong 

  At an age when most men are window shopping for zimmer frames , Ron Marsh is looking forward to his 41st year of rugby with Old Dartfordians after making his debut in December 1951 . 

  The skipper of the Vets and the " C " side first started life as a sprightly 13 stone winger and does not -- as yet -- have any plans to give up . 

  " After all ... you're a long time retired " , he says . 

  " SEEN &amp;amp; HEARD 

  " Times have changed . 

  I cannot get used to the hair gel and body lotions after matches " -- PAUL ACKFORD ( England lock ) when announcing his retirement . 

  " I am still an amateur , of course , but I became rugby's first millionaire five years ago ! " -- DAVID CAMPESE ( Australian wing ) . 

  " When you spend as much time as we did trying to stop others scoring tries , you do not have much time to argue with the ref " -- ZIMBABWE's REPRESENTATIVE when accepting the World Cup Fair Play Award . 

  " The disappointment of losing in the final has gone . 

  You realise you have taken part in the best game of rugby that has ever been played " -- JEREMY GUSCOTT ( Bath and England centre ) . 

  " I picked up my teeth from the pitch and wanted to play on , but a dental consultant from the crowd advised me to have them put back as soon as possible " -- JAMES CHANDLER ( Bedford wing ) after the Pilkington Cup home defeat by Harlequins when he was alleged to have been punched by an England flanker . 

  " They tried to pull me into a scrum once and they invited me into the showers with them " -- GAIL PARKER ( a lady referee ) on problems encountered when trying to control men . 

  " There comes a time when it's not worth the commitment you've got to give " -- ALEX WYLLIE ( retired All Black coach ) . 

  " There is a band of mercenaries going round the circuit , but I would not pay them in washers -- even the big names " -- JOHN PERKINS ( Pontypool coach ) on player transfers in Wales . 

  " Bristol have the best young backs in the country bar none " -- Painter , Redrup , Hull and , on the day , we could not get near Morgan " -- PETER POLLEDRI ( Clifton captain ) after the Pilkington Cup defeat at Bristol . 

  " Tell me . 

  Are there any better stand-offs than Barnes in England ? " -- GEORGE HOOKS ( London Irish Coach ) after his side had lost their opening league games to Bath -- and Stuart Barnes . 

  " It was all about heart . 

  Our players were magnificent in defence in the second half and we somehow managed to keep the Irish out " -- RICHARD GACHES ( Thurrock captain ) after the shock defeat of London Irish in the Pilkington Cup third round . 

  Should it be SOUTH AFRICA 1995 ... ? 

  South Africa is in a state of social and political flux as it enters a new non-racial era -- yet it is still the favoured venue to host the 1995 World Cup . 

  MICK CLEARY argues that no matter how anxious we are to welcome them , the arguments for SA'95 are not as persuasive as they might at first appear . 

  No sooner had Derek Bevan blown the final whistle at Twickenham , than faint noises could be heard from over the horizon . 

  Within a few days the whispers had become a roar -- South Africa for the 1995 World Cup . 

  The chant is certain to be sustained until the International Board announce their decision at their annual meeting in Auckland next April . 

  But why ? 

  What has South Africa got to offer ? 

  Magnificent stadia . 

  Well , yes that's true . 

  Magnificent hospitality . 

  Okay , I shall give you that as well . 

  Magnificent support . 

  Well , now that you mention it , yes . 

  But apart from stadia , hospitality and support , what has South Africa got to offer ? 

  A magnificent rugby culture , top-class competition , commercial opportunities . 

  Okay , those as well ... 

  Grounds for optimism : Ellis Park , Johannesburg , is a 60,000 all-seater ground , the biggest of several magnificent stadia in the country . 

  It's very easy to be seduced by South Africa's case . 

  It meets , and even surpasses , all the criteria laid down by the World Cup committee after the inaugural event in 1987 ; that there should be healthy commercial environment , that the event should be well supported and that it should take place in only one country . 

  As we know , the committee decided to ignore that last objective in 1991 and plumped for five countries , a decision which left those playing in France out in the cold . 

  However , to 1995 . 

  On rational grounds South Africa would seem the ideal place to host the next tournament . 

  Next April's meeting need do no more than put a tick alongside South Africa's name and we can all start booking our tickets for the 1995 thrash . 

  If we did it would be very dangerous indeed . 

  For the whole thrust of the South African lobby is not rational but emotional . 

  Nostalgia tends to be an acute instinct in most sportsmen : in rugby players it can be positively overwhelming . 

  They remember the great journeys through one of the most beautiful countries in the world ; and they remember that the South Africans could legitimately claim to be the world power . 

  The World Cup has not been the same without them . 

  Those are the reasons that South Africa have put forward -- or , more correctly , have had put forward on their behalf -- for hosting the show . 

  Persuasive as both the rational and emotional arguments are , two critical areas are ignored . 

  The first is obvious , or , at least ought to be . 

  South Africa is not stable . 

  No matter what great advances have been made in the last 12-18 months , there is still an awful lot of blood being shed in the country . 

  People are killed every day , almost as a matter of course in South Africa , largely as a result of the internecine tribal disputes . 

  Sadly , the deaths no longer even make the headlines , so commonplace are they . 

  At the moment there seems to be a consensus within South Africa for change . 

  Terrific . 

  But what happens when the right-wing minority decides that they've had enough of this liberal claptrap about integration ? 

  What happens in two or three years time when the ANC's political aspirations have not been met . ? 

  Can anyone really put their hand on their heart and say that there will be no violent backdrop to the 1995 World Cup ? 

  Might not the presence of that tournament in the country excite feelings on either side ? 

  And might it not also stimulate the worst possible scenario or terrorist activity ? 

  It happened at the Olympic games at Munich in 1972 . 

  Can anyone say it would not happen in South Africa in 1995 ? 

  Of course no-one can guarantee anything . 

  The very first international tennis event to be held in the country was disrupted by 30 coloured demonstrators , protesting at the exclusion of the Tennis Association of South Africa , just three weeks ago despite massive security . 

  In fact , the bigger the event , the better the target . 

  It would seem to be that there is still an enormously long way to go before anyone can predict with even a reasonable amount of confidence that the security of the event will not be a problem . 

  Therefore , the IB has to decide to have a last minute replacement on call in the event of a deterioration , or , if that proves logistically and financially prohibitive , reject the South African claim altogether . 

  There are a number of significant steps that have to be taken before the IB can even contemplate making that sort of decision . 

  Up to now the unity talks between the SARB and the black SARU have been far from smooth . 

  The SARU are determined that they shall not be pushed into premature agreement with the other bodies just for the sake of becoming part of the international fold . 

  SARU's president , Ebrahim Patel , recently stated that : 

  " We do not want unity just for the sake of international tours . 

  We do not just want a merging of our unions either . 

  We want a new union to be formed which will represent the interests of everyone . 

  Unity to us is a means of finding a way towards peace and justice in South Africa " . 

  Of course progress has been made . 

  But how far will it have gone before that decision is made next April ? 

  And who is to say that whatever deal between the two sides is struck will actually last ? 

  There is one other nagging doubt about the South African case which , I have to admit , is a wholly emotional objection . 

  Just what have South Africa done for the game during their isolation ? 

  Answer : they have bribed , connived , schemed , cheated and bullied everyone in sight , just to get the odd game or two . 

  If they were not actually paying the players -- Cavaliers , South Pacific Barbarians , Centenary Tour -- they were always threatening to break away and instigate a professional circuit if they were not given games . 

  During this period England and Wales broke off relations with them . 

  Latterly there was an attempt by the South African authorities to distance themselves from the activities of the money men . 

  In truth , through , their protest was no more than a token one . 

  They did nothing to root out the men who bankrolled the 1989 Centenary Tour which was brought together in such a sordid , furtive fashion . 

  Should all this be conveniently forgotten now that the boycott is about to be lifted ? 

  Yes it should , but only if South Africa holds up its hand and admits that money did find its way into certain bank accounts and that the game in South Africa has been awash with money for many years . 

  Otherwise we are back to that old hypocritical state where the game is amateur in name only . 

  Bring South Africa back in by all means , but let us have some honesty this time around . 

  Come to the ball ... 

  Lucrative invitations to the 1989 Centenary games were difficult to resist . 

  What of the other contenders -- Canada , Argentina and New Zealand . 

  Only the latter is a serious player . 

  Both Canada and Argentina admit that it would only be by default that they would take on the task of staging the tournament . 

  The Canadian Rugby Union's director , John Billingsley , stated that his union's bid was contingent upon support from the international rugby community . 

  The approach would have to come from they rather than the other way around . 

  " For the moment Canada has no plans to press its suit for 1995 " . 

  That said , continues Billingsley : " Canada has much to offer in terms of geographic location , climate and language . 

  If an invitation were issued , it would provide an incredible opportunity to encourage the further growth of rugby in both Canada and the USA . 

  Canada offers some superb indoor stadia and the technology exists to enable natural turf , of a quality suitable for such an event , to be installed on a short-term basis . 

  There are also appropriate facilities in most cities " . 

  If Canada were to meet the logistical and commercial demands of the organisers , ought they not to be seriously considered ? 

  There is much to be gained form spreading the game far and wide . 

  The World Cup is the perfect vehicle for doing so . 

  Why not be progressive and try to take the game to new areas of the world ? 

  To return to New Zealand , for example , runs the danger , symbolically at least , of exalting the old , traditional ways of the game . 

  Canada ought to be given the encouragement of making a serious bid . 

  As for Argentina , they cede their ground to South Africa . 

  According to Carlos Tozzi , the president of the Argentine Rugby Union , they have no desire to trump South Africa's bid . 

  He maintains that Argentina owes a lot to South African rugby . 

  He recalled that it was on tour in South Africa that they were christened the Pumas . 

  As a result of this close , long-standing relationship , they would endorse South Africa's claim over their own . 

  Former " Bok glory boys ( l-r ) Frik du Preez , Jannie Engelbrecht and Jan Ellis hoping the new generation enjoys the same opportunities . 

  If the South African option were withdrawn then Tozzi feels that Argentina are more than equipped to step into the breach . 

  Although there are no rugby stadia in the country of sufficient capacity , there are several soccer venues which could more than adequately serve rugby's needs . 

  The River Plate stadium in Buenos Aires holds 75,000 whilst the Velez Sarfield takes around 50,000 . 

  The provincial grounds all hold between 40-50,000 . a lot of improvements to the country's infrastructure -- transport , TV , telecommunications -- were made for the Soccer World Cup in 1978 . 

  There is one other country that has been floated as a serious contender -- Japan . 

  Their case is best put , or rather rejected , but the long serving chairman of the Japanese Union , Shiggy Konno . 

  " We have not made a bid to stage the 1995 Rugby World Cup . 

  Although we may be qualified to do so in certain areas , mainly commercial , we could not really be considered a top-class rugby-playing country strength-wise and have therefore decided not to bid . 

  I do not think we could bid for the money part as Japan has the reputation of trying to get its own way by money . 

  I certainly do not want rugby to follow this pattern " . 

  What should the IB do then next April ? 

  It will not be an easy decision . 

  Perhaps what the authorities need to consider in the few months available to them is just when a decision needs to be made . 

  Of course the more time available the better . 

  But , when it may literally be a matter of life and death , might it not be worth putting things on hold for another twelve months ? 

  After all , this World Cup did not get on the road until two years before the event . 

  If a decision has to be made in April 1992 , then South Africa has some way to go yet before proving its case . 

  Springbok great , TOMMY BEDFORD ( 1963-71 ) , gives an insight into the power struggle between the different governing bodies within the South African game . 

  FOR THE International Rugby Board and its member nations , the solution of the South African " problem " would have been a godsend had it happened either before , during or immediately after the recent Rugby World Cup . 

  They would then , with all the fanfare and attendant publicity , have been able to welcome South Africa back into the international fold with the added perk of hosting the Rugby World Cup in 1995 . 

  They would , at the same time , thereby have removed any suspicion that they had perhaps underhandedly supported the South African Rugby Board , one of their founder members , in ways contrary to the demands of a vociferous international opposition and an unrecognised ( in international rugby circles ) South African Rugby Union . 

  But the South African Rugby Board and the South African Rugby Union continued to get bogged down , as they had been for the last three years , even with the help of intermediaries of the stature of Nelson Mandela , in their attempts to reach accord and form one , united body for rugby football in their country . 

  In the " new South Africa " , as with all sports , this has become the prerequisite for South African rugby's re-entry into the international arena , no matter that those sympathetic to Danie Craven's SARB feel other options to exist . 

  They do not . 

  It may be unfortunate in the unity talks between the two opposing factions that Ebrahim Patel has thus far chosen to make what many would consider to be totally unrealistic demands for his 93-year-old SA Rugby Union . 

  Its predominantly black and brown members have virtually nothing to offer a united body other than themselves and their supporters . 

  Furthermore , it could just be that his union might contain diverse political factions within it which , thanks to years of forced and unenforced apartheid , have come to permeate every fabric of society and may well have forced SARU into an on-going powerplay with SARB . 

  The behaviour of Danie Craven and his 102-year-old SA Rugby Board in this matter could be just as problematic . 

  The Board has had to weather its own political upheavals and adjust to changing circumstances . 

  It has taken the black South African Rugby Association and the " coloured " South African Rugby Federation under its wing , and they no doubt now want to flex their own muscles . 

  But the SA Rugby Board has traditionally had the major slice of South Africa's rugby cake , built as this has been on white wealth , sponsorship , patronage , assets , expertise , media coverage and the rest . 

  The Board could easily stage and manage any world cup through its own , almost unlimited resources . 

  To be expected to relinquish this power , and give up some of the spoils to the likes of SARU , who had been at the forefront in demanding the non-participation of the Springboks in international competition since it was " impossible to play normal sport in an abnormal society " , must , understandably , be a difficult to swallow . 

  In the complexities of such a situation the International Rugby Board obviously should not rely on SARB and SARU to achieve unity before they are to announce who will host the Rugby World Cup in 1995 . 

  But if SARB and SARU did unite before then , given the personalities involved , can the IRB be absolutely assured that unity between SARB and SARU will still prevail in 1995 ? 

  An in that case , now certain can the IRB be that admission to those World Cup matches will not only be freely available to , but will be as readily affordable , by the majority of South Africans , and not necessarily only the privileged few ? 

  If the IRB has any qualms in answering these questions come April 1992 , they should think very carefully if South Africa is to be a serious contender in what would probably be the first genuine and major international event ever held in the country . 

  Secretary of the International Rugby Board , KEITH ROWLANDS , sets out the criteria by which the organisers will determine next April who is to host the 1995 World Cup . 

  THERE IS little doubt that a final decision as to the next hosts of the World Cup will be made in April 1992 . 

  I personally would have preferred that decision to already have been taken . 

  There is simply so much to do and we are already a little behind the schedule . 

  Until we know who is going to stage the event , we can not get on with working out the qualifying format for 1995 . 

  The host country is seeded and with contenders from Canada , Argentina , South Africa and New Zealand there are any number of permutations to sort out . 

  There is no one dominant factor that will decide who gets the vote . 

  There will be a whole matrix of things to consider : The infrastructure of the game in that country ; geographic and climatic factors ; social infrastructure in terms of hotels , hospitals and security ; size of stadia and also the commercial potential of the country's market place . 

  I would like to stress that the commercial consideration is only one of many elements and is certainly not the most important . 

  Rugby World Cup Ltd -- which comprises its three directors , Russ Thomas , Marcel Martin and Sir Ewart Bell -- are at the moment putting together a critical review of the 1991 event . 

  That report should be ready early in the New Year . 

  As a result of their conclusions , some of the bidders may wish to amend their application or , indeed , withdraw it altogether . 

  After that , RWC will present a package to the International Board in April , when they will then be in a position to make their choice . 

  There will be no fact-finding missions to any of the countries in question . 

  We already have enough data on all the relevant areas and , indeed , know from personal experience most of the venues mentioned . 

  All these countries have handled incoming tours in the past with considerable ease and all their faculties are well documented . 

  As far as I am concerned there is really no possibility that the venue will not be announced in April 1992 . 

  If any of the contenders have not got their act together by then , then it is simply too bad . 

  BEST ... on borrowed time ? 

  Australia have shown you have to lose so that you can eventually win . 

  But , as RICHARD BATH discovers , England's appointment of coach DICK BEST for less than a year means that , instead of a bright new era , we can expect a diet of pragmatism and playing the percentages . 

  Can you remember the last time you were given a hospital pass ? 

  You know , the one where some lumbering forward finds himself on the openside and , just as he is about to get well and truly creamed , he ships the ball -- and the whole of the opposition's back row -- over to you ? 

  It's not that you did not want the ball . 

  Quite the opposite , in fact . 

  It's just that you have been waiting all afternoon for it to arrive and now have little choice but to try and bludgeon your way through the waves of cover tacklers . 

  Know that feeling ? 

  Well , so does England's new coach , Dick Best , the man the RFU have given until the end of the season to prove that he deserved to have the appointment renewed . 

  Best had been the heir apparent ever since he burst on to the representative scene as the architect of the London Division's remarkable 21-10 win over the touring Australians at Twickenham in'88 . 

  In that game his side displayed a verve and fair rarely seen in English rugby , let alone at a senior representative level , as they ran the bemused Australians ragged . 

  The national side followed London's lead and England took the Test with a blistering display of 15-man running rugby , eventually finishing convincing 28-19 winners . 

  The rugby world stood up and took notice and Best was marked out as a man destined for greater things . 

  Since then 37-year-old travel agent has steadily climbed the greasy pole towards the job he has coveted most -- that of England coach . 

  And although the path from Harlequins coach to Geoff Cooke's right-hand man has not been without its problems , there has been a sort of inevitability about his gradual promotion to the national squad . 

  But there are those who take issue with Best's appointment . 

  London have certainly dominated the divisional championship , and on those results alone , few could argue with his succession to Uttley . 

  Critics , though , point to a mediocre record at club level -- Harlequins " strength in depth has never been reflected in either their cup or league results -- and to an England " B " record that does not stand any sort of comparison with that of his famous predecessor , Alan Davies ( who England gave the boot ) . 

  So why was not Davies , who worked miracles with such meagre resources at Nottingham ( as has become more and more apparent this season ) and had a near unblemished record as England " B " coach , given the same opportunity at the top level that Best has now been given ? 

  And why has not Jack Rowell , the Bath coach , been pushed with the same vigour that Best appears to have been ? 

  It is certainly true that Rowell had very little success with the South West divisional side , but then -- with the possible exception of becoming Welsh coach -- there are few more thankless tasks than trying to create a cohesive representative side amid the passionate parochialism that provides West Country rugby with its strengths and its limitations . 

  But surely the fact that Rowell has been the brains behind the most successful side in modern British rugby , as well as the man who managed to mesh the England Students into a force so strong that they were able to play World Cup quarter-finalists Canada on their home turf this summer and lose by less than 20 points , puts him on a par with Best . 

  Rowell , though , is hugely loyal to his Bath players and there has always been a worry that he would promote Bath men without due regard for the balance of the side , as Ron Waldron did with such disastrous results for Wales . 

  Best , a former Harlequins captain and coach , is acutely aware that the same charge could be levelled against him . 

  " I am very glad that all the Harlequins players were a part of the England set-up before I had anything to do with it " , said Best . 

  " People have moaned about a Harlequins bias in the current England team , but they did alright this year did not they ? 

  They won the Grand Slam and got to the final of the World Cup . 

  You cannot really argue with that , can you ? " 

  Best himself seems to have few doubts as to why he got the nod , citing the growing importance of the Divisional Championship as the single most important factor in his -- and England's -- meteoric rise . 

  " There has to be some step between club and country . 

  I am pleased that the Divisional Championship has been on everybody's lips around this time each year . 

  It's the reason why England have done so well in recent years , and , of course , it's something that's very close to my heart " . 

  England's Best -- spiky and articulate . 

  But Best , spiky and articulate though he is , is above all a pragmatist . 

  With England " B " , his brief was to bring on young players and to keep fringe members of the England squad ticking over , rather than to aim to win every gage , and that's what he did with the result that a whole crop of younger Englishmen -- Back , Moon and Rodber , to name but three -- are ready to make the transition to the full England team . 

  With London , he says , the 15-man game was just the natural one to play when there were backs of the calibre of Harriman available . 

  To put down the open , running rugby style he has pursued at Harlequins and with London simply to necessity would be wrong , though , for attack as the best form of defence is where Best's basic instincts lie . 

  Hard taskmaster . 

  Dick Best's " raising the tempo " at a recent England training session . 

  But , in the year when England should be starting the rebuilding programme with 1995 in mind , they have wasted Best's proven talent for moulding a youthful team that can play expansive rugby . 

  That talent was presumably the main reason for his appointment , and that's only right and proper because if there's one thing England can learn from Bob Dwyer , it is that you sometimes have to be prepared to let a young side lose in the short-term to gain in the long-term . 

  By giving Best a contract of less than a year , the RFU have asked the ultimate pragmatist to devise the most foolproof method of extending his own tenure -- and that's the safety-first approach . 

  To complete the analogy , it's as if the RFU is a lumbering forward giving a hospital pass that leaves Best no room to sidestep , no alternative but to put his head down and put his trust in the tried and tested battering ram technique . 

  That is surely no basis on which to retain or discard the national coach . 

  " At the moment I've no thoughts at all about preparing for the next World Cup " , said Best . 

  " I've only been given a year's contract , so the main priority will be to win all the matches , using essentially the same side that played in the World Cup . 

  If we win those games , then I shall start thinking about what comes after that . 

  " My main function will be to complement Geoff Cooke . 

  Really I am just looking to raise the pace and the tempo of the England side . 

  We're a little one-paced at the moment , so I want to raise the pace of the training sessions , although that does not mean we have to bring in new blood quite yet " . 

  But whilst Best is certainly under pressure to continue England's winning ways into the Five Nations Championship , the realist with the acid tongue and the blunt manners , which have been the bane of countless committeemen and lacklustre trainers over the years , is by no means just a dour pragmatist . 

  What comes across is his deep determination to do himself justice and an abiding love of the game . 

  " Rugby is all-consuming at any level . 

  The further up the ladder you go , the more it begins to take over your life . 

  I even like going on tour . 

  I always think that it's just the same religion , different cathedral " . 

  BEAUMONT AT LARGE 

  Huge sums of money were generated by the World Cup and it is of the greatest importance that most of it goes back into the game and its development . 

  But it is no less important that players , especially self-employed men like Mike Teague , should not be out of pocket as a result of sacrificing their work time for pre-tournament training and then the competition itself . 

  Teague now faces a dilemma . 

  He has said he lost something like 15,000 in potential earnings as a freelance builder and an injury suffered in the tournament has meant that he is unable to work -- so he loses out both ways . 

  As he is a victim of his own loyalty to the England cause , the RFU's credibility can only be maintained if he is compensated -- even if this means contradicting the edict of the 1890's which caused the original rugby league to break from the union code . 

  It is up to each individual union to deal with this problem , but the obvious right course for all of them is to compensate for broken time -- and this included the RFU . 

  In England , in particular , it's high time that both sides -- administrators and players -- came out into the open and made it quite clear what they want and what they are prepared to do . 

  There are far too many grey areas with endless different interpretations open to every side . 

  What can not be ignored is that the players are the ones who provide the entertainment , sometimes at considerable personal cost . 

  It's not good enough to say that by becoming international stars they are compensated by the kudos this brings with it and that their personal fame enables them to cash in . 

  Tell that to Mike Teague , who can only make money if he can work . 

  Fudging on issues must end now , otherwise there'll be a real threat that England players will call a halt in droves , considering that their sacrifices have not been justified . 

  With the Five Nations fast approaching I hope that most England players shelve any retirement plans -- Paul Ackford and Mike Teague excepted . 

  At the same time it would be wise for Geoff Cooke and his team to recognise that the squad should still be supremely fit after the World Cup and ought not to be flogged to death by being put through intensive squad weekends . 

  The approach to the tournament should be as low key as possible with changes being made only where absolutely necessary . 

  Over the next few years leading up to the 1995 World Cup there'll be plenty of time to slot in replacements as they are needed -- particularly to the front-five where Jason Leonard will probably be the only one available for the next tournament . 

  Priorities are a new tighthead and locks plus a back-row . 

  The backs are still young and should mostly be available in 1995 if they can retain their interest . 

  It's up to the RFU to make it worth their while . 

  The RFU should also take the overdue step of encouraging the development of the game in state schools by paying teachers for the time they spend coaching . 

  There's no point in sending them off on endless -- no doubt excellent -- courses if there's no incentive for them to use up large slices of their spare time in teaching the game . 

  They will just not do it if they are not paid and a chance to develop the game will be lost . 

  It's true that there are plenty of YDO's , but without the help of teachers in the schools they could fighting a losing battle to take advantage of the favourite publicity emanating from the World Cup . 

  ENGLAND ROUND-UP 

  Bath -- business as usual 

  Bath are still favourites to retain the Courage Division One title , but below them , it's a case of the old order well and truly changing . 

  The new boys at this level , London Irish and Rugby , both put up fierce debut challenges before narrowly losing to Bath and Gloucester respectively . 

  The Exiles can also take encouragement , earning their first points at this level when they gained a creditable away draw at Northampton . 

  But for every two up-and-coming clubs that make the grade , there are always two on the way down . 

  It might still be a little premature to consign famous old clubs Nottingham and Rosslyn Park to relegation , but both have been well beaten by a resurgent Bristol -- whose youthful side have been setting a blistering pace at the Memorial Ground so far this season -- and their other results indicate that they face an uphill struggle to maintain their First Division status . 

  Elsewhere , Orrell are flying the flag for top flight northern rugby in their own , inimitable style . 

  Rosslyn Park and Saracens have both endured an early season steamrollering from Wigan's finest . 

  Of the other main contenders , Wasps got the better of Harlequins in their league opener , but neither looks sharp enough to worry Bath this year . 

  Leicester continue to blow hot and cold , although one of the reasons they looked a little below par in their first game was because they were playing a Gloucester side that could be a dark horse for the title . 

  Coach Keith Richardson is always keen to play down their challenge , but in the Cherry and White's Centenary Year there will be few tougher teams to beat . 

  Outside Division One , it is the usual lottery . 

  But , as far as early season form will allow , London Scottish ( Division Two ) , Clifton ( Division Three ) , London Welsh ( Division Four South ) and Wade Dooley's Preston Grasshoppers ( Division Four North ) , all are strong promotion candidates . 

  As in Division One , it is two famous old clubs that are on the receiving end of things in Division Two and Three . 

  Liverpool St Helens , relegated from Division One last year , look destined to make it two drops in two years , as do Third Division Headingley who , racked by internal politics , are contemplating a new life in Division Four North . 

  SCOTLAND 

  BIG AL gives it a bash ! 

  The Glasgow High-Kelvinside prop AL WATT , at 6ft . 5ins and 19 stone one of the bigger " beasties " on the British scene , discusses his shift from lock to front row forward with BILL McLAREN . 

  Alan Gordon James Watt would seem to have the ideal credentials for an international lock . 

  Just 24 , he is 6ft 5ins and just on 19 stones and yet he is no cart-horse . 

  He had played flanker for his club , Glasgow High-Kelvinside , and no.8 for Glasgow Under-21s , but had become thoroughly established as a lock , the position he played in at Kelvinside Academy in Glasgow , where he benefited from the guidance of the school coach , Peter Billington , for Scottish Schools against Ireland and England in 1985 , for his senior clubs side and for Glasgow at senior district level . 

  The Scottish selectors , however , rated his prime potential value to Scotland as a prop and the genial giant is in the process of seeking to establish himself in the tighthead position . 

  Some knowing souls disagree with the national selectors' assessment in reckoning that Watt is too tall for a prop and that in the 1990 District Championship he was the outstanding ball-winner at the front of the line-out . 

  On the other hand , if he makes it as an international tighthead , that line-out capability will prove a handsome bonus as well as his ballast in a Scottish scrummage which has struggled of late . 

  When the national selectors' viewpoint was put to him , Watt took up the challenge : " I was happy to give it a real bash . 

  So much to that I made it clear to my club that I would like to be selected as a tighthead " . 

  He even played in the club second fifteen as a prop in preference to being at lock for the first although , when the senior side was in relegation danger , he acceded to the club selectors' request to revert to lock to help them to safety . 

  Now his club's tighthead , he has gone out of this way to improve his scrummaging technique with specialist advice from among others , his boss , Sandy Carmichael , the 50-times capped Scottish and Lions tighthead Iain Milne ( " immensely helpful " ) and Jim Telfer ( " he is just the kind of coach I need because I can be a bit lazy and the fact that he just keeps at you all the time was very good for me " ) . 

  In the past two weeks he has had to scrummage against Scotland's World Cup looseheads , David Sole and David Milne : " They certainly got the better of me but I like to think that I am learning all the time and that that will lead to my improvement " . 

  The last six months have proved somewhat hectic for Watt and full of the unexpected . 

  He was chosen for Scotland's tour of North America in May , played in four of the six games , including the two non-cap Tests , and scored three tries : " I was delighted to go but I never thought for a moment that I would make the Test side . 

  I felt that I still had so much to learn and there were recognised props in the squad . 

  So it was the surprise selection of my career when I was picked against America and Canada . 

  " The American game was very enjoyable . 

  They are big and physical , but I thought I coped not too badly with the pressure . 

  But I was up against a big , strong lad called Eddie Evans in the Canada game and that was very hard work . 

  We were pleased to see the Canadians do so well in the World Cup after they had beaten us over there " ! 

  The next step was selection for the World Cup squad : " Actually , I was lying in bed with " flu on the Sunday morning of a squad session from which I had called off when Bill Hogg , the SRU secretary , telephoned to say that Iain Milne had been forced to withdraw . 

  Then Duncan Paterson , the selection convenor , came on to say that I had better get myself over to Murrayfield as soon as I could ! 

  " That was a shock , too , and I suppose I wandered about a bit about a bit aimlessly before having a quick breakfast . 

  I was packing my kit when it dawned on me that the squad session would be over before I got there and that I would be concerned mainly with being kitted out as a member of the World Cup squad " . 

  The big fellow's progress will be followed with intense interest by those on both sides of the fence in the argument about his best position , but he soldiers on , keen to learn and with no pretensions . 

  " I am still a bit of novice where scrummaging is concerned . 

  As a lock , if your prop asks for a special effort at a scrummage you just hollow your back , get your feet right and give it all you've got . 

  " At prop , if you do not show aggression and attack your opposite number , whilst contributing to making sure that your own ball is protected , you can be certain that your opponents will give you a hard time . 

  " I have found that the stamina required for propping is greater than that as a lock . 

  I take my hat off to those front row men . 

  My ambition is to earn the respect of rival props as a scrummager . 

  If I can prove myself to them then things could progress from that . 

  " You can not expect to be in the national squad unless you can prove that you are good enough , so I just have to continue the learning process , equip myself fully for the task , get a bit fitter and that , hopefully , will be at least half the battle " . 

  " Geech " stays on 

  Despite the retirement of coaching team-mates Jim Telfer and Derrick Grand after the recent World Cup , Ian McGeechan has committed himself to a further term as Scotland's principal coach . 

  The 1992 Five Nations Championship will , therefore , be his fourth at the helm . 

  Life without " Geech " , as he is affectionately known , is incomprehensible to many of a squad who have risen to world prominence as a direct result of his guidance . 

  Yet there was serious thought given to his continued involvement by McGeechan , a 45-year-old public relations manager with Scottish Life . 

  " With everything that has happened over the last couple of years , I just want to stand back a bit and have a couple of weeks to think about it " , he said , before later confirming his desire to lead a new-look Scotland in 1992 . 

  Big All Watt smashes a path through the Zimbabwe ranks during Scotland's emphatic World Cup victory . 

  SCOTTISH NOTES by Bill McMurtrie 

  RICHIE DIXON , the Scotland B coach for the past three seasons , has been promoted to helping to coach the senior team . 

  The Currie High School PE teacher will be in charge of coordinating the forward' coaching , assisting Ian McGeechan and Douglas Morgan . 

  McGeechan and Morgan continue as selectors . 

  So do Duncan Paterson , the team manager , Graham Young , and Ian Lawrie , with Dixon the one newcomer to the selection committee . 

  JIM TELFER's expertise and long experience have been grated from the national coaching team onto the Scottish Rugby Union . 

  The 1984 Grand Slam coach has been co-opted into the SRU committee to help to bring through new coaches for the future . 

  Edinburgh Accies scrum-half Ian Maclean scrambles the ball away as his opposite number Mike Hall makes a despairing lunge as the champions lose out to David Sole's men 15-21 at Meggetland in the league . 

  Three first-division clubs have announced new sponsorship . 

  Jed-Forest signed a 30,000 deal for three years' backing from the TSB , Melrose will receive a minimum of 10,000 this season from Concept Group , sponsorship which , through bonuses , could rise to 15,000 if they win the national championship and the Border League , and Stewart's Melville have a season's 15,000 support from Dial Office Systems . 

  Melrose have also renewed their seven sponsorship with Bell's the Perth-based whisky company committing 150,000 for the next three tournaments . 

  The Melrose guests on April 11 will include Amatori Milan ( David Campese's club ) , the Irish Wolfhounds ( last year's winners ) , Bay of Plenty , the first visitors to the tournament from New Zealand , and the US Cougars . 

  GLASGOW ACADEMICAL's Mac-Gregor brothers , Calum and Graeme , are back together . 

  Graeme has returned to New Zealand after a season with Academicals' Edinburgh namesakes . 

  Two other Edinburgh players have switched to Glasgow clubs . 

  Jeremy Richardson , Edinburgh Academicals " 1987 World Cup lock , has joined Glasgow High/ Kelvinside , and Richard Hastings has swopped from Currie to West of Scotland . 

  GEORGE GRAHAM , the Glasgow and Scotland " B " prop , has left Stirling County to go to rugby league with Carlisle . 

  SCOTLAND will return to a victory venue for the B international against France on February 2 . 

  The game will be played in Albi , where the Scots won 13-10 in 1984 . 

  ABERDEENSHIRE , celebrating their centenary this season , have linked up with Glentanar footballers and St Ronalds cricketers to build a 140,000 clubhouse at Woodside . 

  SCOTLAND'S UNDER-18s will break new ground with matches against Spain and Ireland in the spring . 

  The Spanish match will be in Glasgow on Saturday , April 4 , and the Irish game in Dublin a week later . 

  Work on the first stage in MURRAYFIELD's redevelopment , building stands to replace the north and south terracing , will begin immediately after Scotland's final home match in the Five Nations' Championship , the game against France on March 7 . 

  By the end of the World Cup the Scottish Rugby Union's debenture scheme had raised more than 22m of the 37m needed to finance the overall redevelopment . 

  Youth rugby in Scotland will be sponsored with 200,000 over three more years by Digital , the electronic company . 

  The original deal was for the same time and same sum , but the difference now is that the new contract covers rugby only for the age bracket between 16 and 18 . 

  The Scottish Rugby Union are thus free to enlist sponsors for the younger age groups . 

  The ANGLO-SCOTS won only one of their four under-21 championship matches on their visits over the Border in September and October , and that was an upset . 

  They beat the South 16-9 at Kelso but lost to Edinburgh , Glasgow and North and Midlands . 

  FRED McLEOD , from Stewart's Melville , is Scotland's new representative on the International Rugby Football board , replacing Gordon Masson , who is now the SRU president . 

  MELROSE won the first major sevens of the season , beating Hawick 24-6 in the final of Glasgow High/ Kelvinside's Ryden tournament . 

  CHARLIE BISSET , a member of the elite club of players who have turned out for three Scottish districts , has been elected as an Edinburgh representative on the Scottish Rugby Union committee . 

  He played for Glasgow while he was with Jordanhill , North and Midlands out of Stirling University and Edinburgh from Heriot's , his current club . 

  Glasgow High/ Kelvinside are hopeful that Shade Munro's prolonged absence will be over in the New Year . 

  Munro has been out of rugby since his complex leg break in April , 1990 , an injury that forced him to drop out of Scotland's tour to New Zealand that summer . 

  SCOTLAND will not be competing in the Hong Kong Sevens next year . 

  The SRU turned down an invitation because of a packed calendar . 

  PRESTON LODGE are to join with local football club Preston Athletic in a 500,000 project to upgrade Pennypit Park . 

  Glasgow High/ Kelvinside pick up the McEwan's club of the month award for October after huge victories over Glasgow Accies , Queens University Belfast , Kilmarnock and Stewart's-Melville FP . 

  They went through the month undefeated . 

  WALES 

  CAPTAIN SCARLET 

  You know that times are changing in Wales when a man as outspoken and innovative as Llanelli's GARETH JENKINS can become a national coach and selector . 

  STEVE BALE talked to the Scarlets' rebel with a cause . 

  Gareth Jenkins possessed one of the outstanding talents of his Seventies' generation but injury prevented it demonstration at the very highest level and it is as a Scarlet , the epitome of Llanelli as player and coach , that he has always been seen and highly regarded . 

  No-one , therefore , should underestimate the length of the step Jenkins has taken in agreeing to assist Alan Davies in coaching Wales . 

  But there again , by his own admission Jenkins is having the best both worlds . 

  Denied a selection vote because of his continuing association with one particular club , he can carry on coaching Llanelli while also -- at last -- having the input into the national team that many have for years wanted him to have . 

  All this , and he is only 40 . 

  " It's an opportunity to keep my club commitment going and have a look at what the Wales set-up entails " , he said in one of the many television interviews that followed his appointment as Davies's no . 2 . 

  In other words , if he does not like what he sees , the eventual succession from Davies to Jenkins would not , as is now widely assumed , be inevitable . 

  " I am sure I am there just to concentrate on coaching and I am sure that's the first thing I need to look at " , Jenkins also said . 

  " My first aim has to be success with Llanelli but now that I've accepted this position I am going to be totally committed to developing Welsh rugby " . 

  Divided loyalties such as infected Welsh rugby when Neath had their recent preponderance in the national squad ? 

  Not a bit of it . 

  For one thing , Jenkins is far too astute to fall for that , and for another other Welsh clubs are enthusiastic in his support . 

  And , by the way , Jenkins pulls no punches on the prospects for the Wales side now partly his to command : " Substantial improvement is going to be necessary before we can even consider winning " . 

  It is only a couple of years ago that Jenkins rejected out of hand the Wales involvement he has now taken on , and -- until Davies and the Wales manager , Robert Norster , beat their path to his door -- he has tended to use the expression " poisoned chalice " whenever anyone sounded out his interest or rather the lack of it . 

  The point was that Jenkins was a nonconformist , a rebel even ; an " unqualified " coach who would disdain the Welsh Rugby Union coaching certificate , which to others is a glittering prize , as a scrap of paper . 

  He has also , on occasion , been one of the WRU's sharpest critics . 

  Consider this from May 1989 : " I have to live within the set-up but I do not have to agree with everything that happens . 

  That does not mean I necessarily disagree either , but if I am asked a question I give an answer . 

  Since they cannot stop me doing that , I've made my views on Welsh rugby very clear . 

  WE used to lead the way , set the trend ; things have been allowed to drift so much that now we're struggling to catch up " . 

  In this them-and-us situation , Jenkins was emphatically one of " them " out there on the ground . 

  Less than three years on he is one of " us " in the establishment and happy to acknowledge that the reorganisation for which he stridently called is , albeit belatedly , being carried out . 

  Jenkins has enjoyed great success with Llanelli : the Schweppes Cup in 1988 , the Welsh Merit Table and Cup final in 1989 , the Cup and second place in the inaugural Heineken League in 1991 . 

  But his failure to attend a WRU coaching course ( a sin of omission shared with Ray Prosser , perhaps the finest coach of forwards Welsh rugby ever had ) coupled with his outspokenness denied him access to the magic circle . 

  Not that it worried him . 

  " My beliefs , interests and ambitions lie purely and simply in coaching Llanelli " , he once said . 

  " As the club have never expected me to have a coaching certificate , I've never considered it worth the effort just to get a piece of paper . 

  There have to be some standards but a track record is more important than spending three weekends away being taught something you already know , and I am quite happy to stand or fall on my personal record . 

  I do not expect the Union to like that , but I am perfectly happy as I am " . 

  Compare that with his current view ; " Coaches , like players , should have ambitions " . 

  Talking of personal records , Jenkins' as a player was an eccentric mixture of distinction and disappointment . 

  A superbly energetic and inventive open-side flanker , he was 21 when he played in the Scarlets which beat the 1972 All Blacks . 

  Most believe he would have played for Wales but for a serious knee injury in 1975 which put him out of rugby for two years . 

  Stand and deliver ! 

  Jenkins' men show how it's done as Neath succumb to the Scarlets 23-23 in the recent Division One clash at the Gnoll . 

  This was the worst , but by no means only , such blow . 

  Of the five successive Club finals in which Llanelli appeared from 1972-76 , Jenkins played in only two . 

  He missed the 1972 defeat by Neath with a broken ankle , returned for the'73 win over Cardiff and then missed the'74 defeat of Aberavon after needing 20 stitches in a head wound suffered in a charity match a week before the final . 

  He reappeared in the following year's repeat win over Aberavon , but by the time Swansea were beaten in 1976 his knee had left him idle again . 

  Once he had recovered he played on , not quite as convincingly as before , until 1979 . 

  In 10 years with Llanelli his grand total of games was a miserly 260 . 

  Gareth Jenkins -- " The freshest , most innovative Welsh analyst of modern rugby " . 

  After two years spent coaching his home village club , the aptly named Furnace , Jenkins was back at Stradey Park in 1982 for a five-year apprenticeship as assistant coach to Alun Lewis . 

  Since 1987 , when he had a difficult first few months while the recently arrived Jonathan Davies was recovering from injury , he has established himself as the freshest , most innovative Welsh analyst of modern rugby . 

  In a neat piece of role-reversal , Lewis , who went on to become the Wales Under-21 coach , is now Jenkins's assistant at Stradey . 

  Just because Jenkins , courtesy of Davies and Norster , has become an insider does not mean he will keep his thoughts to himself . 

  Nor should he , for he has much of value to say . 

  " The organisation of the Welsh Union should recognise and understand that club coaches are the developers of international players . 

  Only when they become international players do they become the responsibility of international coaches . 

  Therefore , you need a system to be in place at club level just as much as at international level " . 

  This is precisely what the Union has gone some way to doing with its appointment of Glen Ball , Leighton Davies and John Perkins -- respectively Neath manager , Maesteg coach and Pontypool coach -- to act as Alan Davies's go-between with the Welsh First Division clubs . 

  In these changing circumstances Jenkins is willing to accept his responsibility , as club coach as much as assistant national coach , for Wales' present condition and uncertain future . 

  " We , the club coaches , should be as accountable for Welsh success as international coaches are . 

  It's absolutely no good expecting international players to develop the correct habits of fitness , conditioning and preparation if we do not instil them at club level . 

  What we are talking about is moving the responsibility down a stage so that there is a system in place that recognises individual club players and helps them when they move up . 

  There are a lot of players at the moment who cannot make the step from club to international rugby " . 

  What Jenkins is suggesting would also have the wider benefit of bringing the leading clubs and the Welsh Rugby Union into the same camp . 

  This division and those between bigger and smaller clubs , and between east Wales and West Wales , are among the most damaging bequests of a history whose many years of glory occurred despite ( certainly not because of ) native parochialism , introspection and even sometimes indolence . 

  In his newly exalted position , Jenkins may come to choose his words more carefully , but it was only the other day that he was saying ; " There is no doubt we are poor ; it's no good pretending we are not . 

  We are a third-rate rugby nation at present , but that does not mean we have to stay third-rate " . 

  In the end you have to become part of the establishment , Gareth , but never let them remove or circumscribe your right of free speech ; you use it too well and the rest of us can not do without it . 

  Wall-to-Wall 

  PENARTH , for so long the chopping blocks of senior Welsh club rugby , gained their first-ever Heineken League win by beating Ebbw Vale 13-12 . 

  And they did it away from home after trailing 12-3 at half-time 

  BILLY THOMAS , the former Cardiff , Abertillery and Wales hooker , continues to make a contribution to rugby 30 years after winning his last cap . 

  Billy , back coaching Bedwas , says : " At 58 it's likely I am the country's oldest coach -- and the dullest " ! 

  Making a welcome return to the Ebbw Vale squad is South African STEFANUS " BARLIE " SWART . 

  An outstanding tight-head prop from Western Province , Swart played 17 games for Vale during the 1989-90 season . 

  SIMON McCRACKEN , a 21-year-old fullback , has made the jump from fourth division Blackwood to first division Newport in a style which stamps him as a player to watch . 

  GRAHAM DAVIES the former Cambridge blue and Wales " B " wing , has joined Bridgend after his surprise omission from the Neath squad . 

  PONTYPOOL will tour New Zealand next July , playing six games in the Bay of Plenty , Waikato and Auckland provinces . 

  South Wales Police head for Hong Kong at the end of the season to play Hong Kong Police the Royal Regiment of Wales and an Invitation XV . 

  Pontypridd captain STEELE LEWIS had a three-week suspension imposed on him by his club following what was described as " an internal incident " . 

  Centre Lewis , who continues as captain , sat out three league matches . 

  Former Wales fullback PAUL THORBURN started the Heineken League season by completing 200 games for Neath . 

  On the way to that milestone he scored 1,934 points made up of 73 tries , 407 conversions , 275 penalties and one drop goal . 

  His next target is to become the first player to reach 2,000 points for the Welsh All Blacks . 

  A black border surround the cover of the Welsh Brewers Rugby Annual -- signifying that the game in Wales at international level is dead ! 

  Editor Arwyn Owen writes : " Never in the previous 22 editions of the annual have we had to record such disastrous episodes of failure by our senior national team ... our game is at its lowest ebb in history " . 

  Despite the gloom and doom , this popular annual remains a bargain buy at 3.99 -- providing a fact packed review of Welsh rugby at all levels . 

  The Welsh national team is about to undergo yet another change -- this time in the design of their jerseys . 

  Details of a deal with leisure wear company Cotton Traders will be announced shortly . 

  The two tries wing GLEN WEBBE scored against Saracens took his total for Bridgend to 250 -- and he has since increased that to 255 . 

  Bridgend's other scoring star , fly-half Aled Williams , has made a sparkling start to the season with 160 points from 12 games -- including 23 against Cross Keys , 27 against London Welsh and 30 against Glamorgan Wanderers . 

  The shock waves caused by the resignation of ALAN PHILLIPS as Cardiff coach could be rippling around the Arms Park for quite some time . 

  Phillips , believing that some players had lost confidence in him , quit after 2 years in the post . 

  But there is also a feeling that he was manoeuvred out because of a split in the Cardiff camp . 

  Whatever the rights and wrongs of a sad situation , the fact remains that the club has made a dreadful start this season -- winning only four of their first 13 games . 

  There is certainly enough talent in the squad to stop the rot . 

  That is now the task of Peter Manning and Malcolm Childs , the new joint senior coaches working under team manager John Scott . 

  DOWN THE LINE 

  with PHIL BENNETT 

  No fly-half factory productivity bonus ! 

  Wales was once known as a fly-half factory , but since Jonathan Davies went North there has been not a single successor of world class selected for the national team and at the moment the signs are not good that one is about to come off the production like . 

  There are , however , two -- perhaps three -- who might eventually make the grade . 

  With the wisdom of hindsight it's obvious that Mark Ring , who in his Pontypool days looked as if he might be the answer to all our no.10 prayers , was unfit and a liability in the match against Australia . 

  His international career may be over . 

  Top of my list of " possibles " is Colin Stephens , who had a poor spell last season after Llanelli's loss against Neath but had recovered by the time of the Schweppes Cup final . 

  This season his form was confirmed , appropriately enough , against Neath at the Gnoll , where he demonstrated his main assets of speed off the mark and eye for an opening . 

  But he must work on his kicking in general , especially where he is trying to find touch . 

  At international level the likes of Gavin Hastings crucify failed touch attempts . 

  He also needs to improve his drop-outs . 

  Once he gets the basics right he could be really good . 

  Colin Stephens -- the most promising prospect from a limited stock of fly-half talent . 

  Next is Aled Williams of Bridgend , whose consistency in domestic matches , which might not be transferred to internationals , should have earned him more than a replacement honour ( out of position ) against Namibia in 1990 . 

  Some call him a good bread-and-butter player , but he has not apparent weaknesses . 

  If he has , they will only be discovered if he is put to the test . 

  Neil Jenkins of Pontypridd was badly exposed last season and the summer tour to Australia was truly a baptism by fire , but he has the physique to return to the top level if his confidence can be restored . 

  He has all the basic attributes and tackles well into the bargain . 

  All three have fine club scrum-half partners -- Robert Moon at Llanelli , Robert Howley at Bridgend and Paul John at Pontypridd . 

  Another fine prospect is Adrian Davies , the Cambridge University captain , but he has not been blessed with much luck recently and I hope his experiences in Australia , when some of his team-mates threw in the towel , will not have destroyed his confidence . 

  All could take a leaf out of the book of Grant Fox , who performances for New Zealand were the result of constant practice at all the basics . 

  He may have been off colour in the World Cup , but he had set a fine example to others . 

  The World Cup illustrated what high standards our aspiring outside-halves must achieve . 

  Top man for me was Michael Lynagh of Australia with the Western Samoan Steve Bachop next in line . 

  The other Home Unions do not have brilliant fly-halves , but they are all consistent , play to their strengths , enjoy good scrum-half partners and know that they are virtually certain to be selected , which makes their jobs much easier . 

  Rob Andrew , Craig Chalmers and Ralph Keyes may not be everyone's cups of tea and it's quite possible that someone like Colin Stephens may turn out to be a far greater player , but for England , Scotland and Ireland each one has shown that he is virtually indispensable . 

  All three of them have produced when it comes to " bottom line " basics which is why they all now appear in their respective sides automatically . 

  They play to their strengths intelligently . 

  The Welsh lads have a long way to go before they match that sort of consistency , but it only needs one to become a permanent fixture for everything to change . 

  IRELAND 

  HAMILTON GOES FOR IT ! 

  " Decisive action in the hour of need denotes the hero but does not succeed " . 

  GORDON HAMILTON'S magnificent try against Australia fits Hilaire Belloc's rhyme to a " t " but , as SEAN DIFFLEY discovers , this hero will run and run ... 

  You could earn your living sailing nowadays . 

  And it's good fun , too " . 

  Thus spoke Gordon Hamilton , the scorer of that try at Lansdowne Road against the Australians . 

  It was not quite the case of an interview running off the rails , or the legendary cowboy -- ( me , not him ) -- galloping off in al directions . 

  It was , simply , Gordon explaining that " the try " was scored on the fourth anniversary , roughly , of stopping -- weighing anchor ? -- at the Canaries en route in a 47-footer across the Atlantic to the USA . 

  He had taken a sabbatical that autumn from the family business , opted for a life , or , more accurately , a few weeks , on the ocean wave . 

  The Hamilton Run : 1 . 

  The big sprint , ball in hand . 

  It was a time , too , for a bit of thought about the future , both career and sport . 

  In the USA there was an offer of a job . 

  It was tempting right enough . 

  But at home there was the secure place in the family business and , important among the priorities of a 22-year-old , the dreamy days on the Belfast Lough with the Royal Ulster Y. C. , or the lazy days on the Royal Belfast G. C. fairways . 

  2 . 

  Keeping Campese at bay in a full-blooded charge for the line . 

  So rugby won ? 

  " And how ! 

  This year of 1991 I was out on a boat once " . 

  Gordon Frederic Hamilton is a product of Campbell College , one of the great rugby nurseries -- Mike Gibson , Ken Kennedy are among its most noted products . 

  The " Frederic " denotes the German infusion in the family -- his great-grandfather was German -- and on his mother's side there is the Scottish influence . 

  Going to Dundee University , then , was not such a culture shock . 

  His subjects were business administration and German . 

  German ? 

  " I can get by " . 

  Next step was London to work for a shipping company and to play rugby for Blackheath . 

  In that season with Blackheath he was chosen for Kent and played in flanking company with Micky Skinner , against Queensland . 

  " That season " , he reckons , " I discovered I had something to offer ; that I could play with the big boys . 

  Perhaps I should have gone to London Irish , but they were a bit far away from where I was living " . 

  What the sojourn with Blackheath and Kent did bring home to Gordon Hamilton was the tendency , even those few years ago , of the Irish selection committees to ignore overseas talent . 

  He believes that had he remained in Belfast , his elevation to the Ulster team and the Irish squad might have come much earlier . 

  So , like so many in Irish rugby , he welcomes the arrival of the Irish Exiles project which aims at enrolling the large number of those with Irish qualifications who live in England , Scotland and Wales , and up to year or so ago were almost totally ignored in Ireland . 

  But the new approach , with Ciaran Fitzgerald keeping in close touch with his London Irish contacts , with the brothers John and Barry O'Driscoll in Manchester and with Feidhlim McLoughlin in Newcastle , means that now the Irish net is being widely cast . 

  Not that , nowadays Gordon Hamilton is allowed to fade into any sort of anonymity . 

  The try that has been reckoned the try of the World Cup ensures that . 

  While England will recall forever Obolensky's try , Wales the depredations committed on England by Keith Jarrett and his 19 points -- including that try -- in Cardiff in 1967 , the Irish have elevated the Hamilton try to the highest point in the Great Pantheon of Irish rugby feats . 

  " I am not being modest about it , but I was lucky to be in the right place at the vital moment " , he says . 

  " The results have been amazing . 

  One man sent me a sequence of photos . 

  I've had newspaper cutting sent to me by other people . 

  Obviously many look on it as a significant occasion which is very , very flattering " . 

  3 . 

  The stuff of legend as Egerton's last ditch tackle fails . 

  But , Gordon confesses , the try really resulted from him being a bit slow on the occasion . 

  " We have a good code system and I know where the ball should be , but it's not too often that it is where it should be . 

  As it happened , being a bit slow to the action , I was in a position to see exactly what was happening . 

  I burst on to the pass from Jack Clarke , had a wee look and saw I was in the clear . 

  " You're going to have to go for it " , I told myself , and off I went . 

  The next morning I felt awful . 

  It was not just the defeat , how near and yet so far away . 

  It was just that the World Cup had been such a marvellous occasion , a tremendous experience . 

  All 26 members of the Irish squad had got on superbly , just like a club side . 

  There was not any kind of conflict or argument throughout the whole time of our assembly . 

  There were so many good things . 

  We were all sad it was over " . 

  But now to the future and the Five Nations Championship where the Irish are quietly confident that , with a virtually unchanged squad , they could well be highly successful . 

  " It's been said that I am a much improved player this season " , Hamilton says , " but I believe that the difference is merely that I am that much more confident . 

  And getting nine caps in one year is something special . 

  " I believe that this club atmosphere in the Irish squad is very important . 

  We have shown our critics that the summer reverses and the indifferent form in the warm-up matches meant nothing . 

  We showed when we pull on the green jerseys , when the real chips are down , that we would die for each other . 

  " But I think we must move the ball a bit more effectively . 

  We are well aware we must do that but I am sure we will with the confidence of the good displays in the World Cup behind us " . 

  Gordon Hamilton signalled his very serious approach to rugby and the international game when he moved from NIFC to Ballymena at the start of the season . 

  It was a wrench because the Hamiltons have always been associated with " North " . 

  His father , Jim , is a former captain of the club . 

  But , as Gordon said at the time , " to maintain my challenge for a place on the national side and even to take part meaningfully in the national squad training , it is necessary to train and play club football at the very highest level " . 

  Ballymena are one of the top sides in Division One of the All Ireland League but his old club were demoted from Division Two last season . 

  It's a pattern that Irish rugby will see a lot more of in the coming years as the successful clubs in this new , competitive All Ireland League attract the top players . 

  It's a scene in which only serious players will survive . 

  Gordon Hamilton will have time for sailing boats only in his bath . 

  IRISH REPORT 

  with Sean Diffley 

  Since the World Cup , the Irish international squad and its commercial manager , Tom Power , have been locked in discussions with the IRFU on the vexed question of the potential commercial earning powers of the players . 

  The players have been represented in the discussions by Ciaran Fitzgerald , Phillip Matthews and Brendan Mullin . 

  During the World Cup , and both before and after , the players have been prevented from arranging deals . 

  The IRFU president Tony Browne and the chairman of the IRFU amateur subcommittee , Roly Meates , are said to have been very sympathetic towards the players . 

  But that apparently , is not the general approach . 

  But both sides have agreed to further talks and both say that they are hopeful soon of a successful outcome to the discussions . 

  STEVE BACHOP , the Western Samoan outside-half who impressed so much in the World Cup , is back for his second successive season with the Dublin club , Blackrock College . 

  Bachop , brother of the All Blacks scrum-half , returned immediately to Dublin after his team was beaten by Scotland . 

  In fact , he turned up to his Blackrock club ground at Stradbrook , to watch his brother Graeme training for the New Zealand side in preparation for the Lansdowne Road semi-final . 

  WILLIE ANDERSON's day-job may be with the Irish Rugby Football Union as a development officer , responsible for the northern part of the island , but his interest in his club , Dungannon , is still very strong . 

  Not only is he captain of the club , but he is playing a major role in the Dungannon team's bright start to the All Ireland League . 

  Last season , Dungannon won the Ulster League which qualified them for a " round-robin " series with the other provincial winners in a bid to gain entry to the AIL . 

  So , not only did Anderson's Dungannon qualify , but they quickly went to the top of the Division Two table and are now making a great bid for promotion . 

  CORK CONSTITUTION , winners last season of the inaugural All Ireland League , are struggling this season . 

  Their problem is a horrendous run of injuries . 

  There was good news at the start of the season with the leading flanker , Pat O'Hara , joining them from Sunday's Wells . 

  But the good mews petered out rapidly especially in the back row where O'Hara was the only one to come through a game against Old Wesley in Dublin . 

  Flanker Len Dineen received a broken ankle , and no.8 Victor Donnelly knee ligament damage . 

  Neither is likely to return to action for many weeks . 

  Brian Rigney -- back soon . 

  BRIAN RIGNEY , the Greystones lock who was to have been an important part of Ireland's plans for the World Cup , is recovering rapidly from his knee injury sustained in Namibia . 

  Rigney , the strong redhead , had to return home for the tour and Donal Lenihan was flown out as his replacement . 

  Rigney has been training quietly on his own over the past few weeks and believes that he will be back in action in the New Year for Greystones . 

  His ambition , of course , is to challenge for his old place in the second row of the Irish scrum . 

  WHAT EDDIE BUTLER SAW ... 

  It's all very well attracting massive new support , but what do you do with it when the World Cup is over ? 

  Even the Five Nations Championship might appear a little limp after the events of the autumn , so what chance has club rugby of hanging on to any of the converts in the meantime ? 

  Well , league and cup matches may not have quite the lure of England and Australia , but , as far as I can tell , clubs are doing their utmost to keep rugby's momentum going . 

  This season the domestic affairs of England and Wales , at least , seem to be destined for dramatic pathways all the way into the spring . 

  Take London Irish , for example . 

  There they were on the first , belated , league Saturday of the season , celebrating their arrival in the first division , unveiling new-look Sunbury as a showpiece of healthy ambition and running Bath so close that the perennial might of the champions was instantly called into question . 

  Then , two weeks later , London Irish set off to play Thurrock , a short trip involving an exit from the M25 and the Pilkington Cup . 

  However , easy or hard the Irish find league life from now on , they will offer new , unpredictable dimensions of entertainment . 

  Meanwhile , Bath were issuing a reminder that reports of their decline were a little premature . 

  They welcomed Nottingham to the Recreation Ground and stuck 50 points on them , an ominous warning to everyone that it's not just World Cup teams who can set new standards . 

  Bath have as many people running off the ball , as many ball-handling forwards , as many backs capable of giving a looped miss-pass as anyone at any level . 

  They also revealed a new generosity of spirit , deciding that , if they carried on playing thus , they would win everything with such ease that the various English competitors would lose their sparkle . 

  So , Bath surrendered a league point on the grounds that they had fielded an ineligible player , New Zealander Laurie Heatherley , against London Irish . 

  And , no doubt , if ever John Hall discovers the identity of the anonymous benefactor who spilt the beans , he will want to shake him warmly by the hand and offer him thanks on behalf of his club and the good of all in English rugby . 

  Even in Wales , where gloom and doom should have been the order of the next year or two , the clubs have set off in a style which has brought , instead , a nervous smile or two . 

  Llanelli and Neath put on a show as good as anything seen for a long time at club level . 

  But just when it seemed that the former were to disappear up a one-club road to exclusive excellence , along came Newport and beat them to mark the first real return on all the investment at Rodney Parade . 

  The week before , the name of Llanelli outside-half Colin Stephens , was being bandied around as the latest answer to all of Wales' woes . 

  Then , suddenly , it was the vets , Paul Turner and David Waters , who still controlled Welsh rugby . 

  It's a good , dramatic blend and , given that the rest of the Heineken League is equally topsy-turvy , it makes for an entertaining diversion while Alan Davies , Bob Norster and Gareth Jenkins wrestle with the real problems on the big stage . 

  Not all club matches are overflowing with new confidence or a new desire to experiment with tactics beyond safety-first . 

  But that's perfectly acceptable in a game with a history of variety . 

  Survival , based on tried and trusted methods , is as much a dramatic factor in the theatre of club rugby as fresh sights . 

  What really matters at the moment is that the rugby pot keeps itself on the boil , so that it will not need too much of a boost from the fickle flames of European International rugby , when it returns in the New Year , to reactivate the interest of the casual followers uncovered by the World Cup . 

  Hand-me-down : Bath's Phil de Glanville , gives Nottingham's Kevin Stiles the push as they crush the Midlanders 52-0 in the Third Round of the Pilkington Cup . 

  Anybody who thought that Bath's tight grip on the Pilkington Cup was over had better think again . 

  Andy Robinson's side may be a blend of the old and the new , but they still look like the side to beat again after demolishing Nottingham in the first round and drawing last year's losing finalists , Northampton , in the quarter-finals . 

  No doubt coach Jack Rowell will already have pencilled in the champagne breakfast he gives his players every time they win the league or cup for May 2nd -- the day after the Pilkington Cup final . 

  RUGBY WORLD POSTER 

  100,000 HAIL THE AUSSIE ACES ! 

  When the Wallabies first heard of plans to stage a tickertape parade through the streets of Sydney to acknowledge their World Cup victory , there were grave reservations . 

  " What happens if nobody turns up " ? quizzed more than one anxious Wallaby . 

  After all , rugby union has been the poor footballer brother to rugby league in Sydney for decades . 

  Rugby league's media coverage has reached saturation point while rugby union has always struggled to maintain a constant high profile among both the media and the public . 

  But the Wallabies' World Cup campaign and ultimate victory has resulted in a nationwide level of rugby union interest which has never been previously registered . 

  And that interest was reflected when over 100,000 people filled six blocks of George Street from Circular Quay to the Town Hall to cheer home the Wallabies . 

  There have been previous sporting tickertape parades for the 1982 Commonwealth Games team and the 1989 Ashes-winning cricketers . 

  But neither reached the noise and level of support that the Wallaby parade received . 

  Instead of the Wallabies asking if anyone would turn up , there were several city employers wondering if any of their staff would turn up after the 30-minute parade ended followed by a ceremony at Town Hall where captain Nick-Farr Jones was presented the key to the City of Sydney . 

  Coloured streamers , toilet paper , telephone book pages , shredded paper and confetti rained on the players from skyscrapers , while building site workers clambered off scaffolding and others out of office windows to cheer Farr-Jones and his players . 

  The public's response was so overwhelming that the procession of cars , which each carried two team members , was halted several times as fans surged around the cars asking for autographs , shaking hands and giving the occasional kiss . 

  The Wallabies knew there was high interest in Australia when they prepared for the semi-final and final matches . 

  The sheer weight of goodwill fax messages told them of this fact . 

  So did the record-breaking domestic television ratings . 

  But the response during the tickertape parade astonished the players . 

  Hooker Phil Kearns said : " If winning can inspire so many people than I can put up will the months of hard slog , sleepless nights , aches and pains and fleeting fears of failure that make up a World Cup campaign . 

  This is overwhelming . 

  I did not think so many people cared " . 

  Flanker Simon Poidevin's smile resembled a split water melon for the duration of the parade . 

  " In a word , sensational . 

  I am stunned by it all " , he said . 

  The parade was organised for the players and the public but the day was even more special for 13-year-old Julian Stewart , a sufferer of cerebral palsy . 

  Young Julian was at kerbside when the car set off and David Campese asked him if he wanted a ride . 

  He was then picked up and rode the entire parade sitting between Campese and Kearns . 

  This was no PR prank but just a genuine and touching gesture by Campese . 

  Touchdown ! 

  Ewen McKenzie ( left ) and Tony Daly raise the " Cup of Good Cheer " during the tickertape cavalcade through Sydney . 

  Some minutes earlier , Campese and Farr-Jones were announced as worthy additions to the New South Wales Sports Hall of Champions by Premier Nick Greiner at a ceremony prior to the parade . 

  They will join other Australian rugby legends such as Sir Nicholas Shehadie , Tony Miller , Peter Johnson , Ken Catchpole and Simon Poidevin among other Olympic and international sports stars . 

  In fact , it was a roller-coaster few days for Campese . 

  He was not exactly the Australian Rugby Football Union's pin-up boy when his Italian club Milan initially refused him permission to participate in the parade . 

  But he finally slipped into Sydney and left having signed a lucrative new deal to assist Australian rugby's new television broadcaster , Channel Ten , with their marketing of rugby for the next three years . 

  This deal with Channel Ten will ensure that Campese continues playing Test rugby despite his statements earlier this year that he would step down from international rugby and establish a permanent business base in Italy . 

  The Channel Ten broadcasting deal shocked the Australian public as the Australian Broadcasting Corporation has been televising rugby for 30 years . 

  In contrast , Channel Ten had been televising rugby league for 18 years until Channel Nine recently acquired future rights . 

  The ARFU's decision has still yet to sink in with many rugby traditionalists but Channel Ten displayed instant commitment to their new deal when they televised the tickertape parade live throughout Australia . 

  Sheer weight of dollars forced the ARFU to change hose broadcasters and the finer details , such as broadcasting times , have yet to be finalised . 

  However , Channel Ten has already stated that it will be keen for more night games which would be shown live during prime-time viewing . 

  And , judging by the ABC's World Cup ratings , the heightened interest in Australian rugby could be well served by night games . 

  Sydney and Brisbane have always been strong rugby cities but Perth's astonishing ratings figures have delighted the ARFU . 

  Following the World Cup and the success of this year's Golden Oldies Festival in Perth , the ARFU is certain to play a Test match in the Golden West in the near future . 

  And , if talks with the West Samoans are successful , a Test with Peter Fatialofa's men of next year may be the first match . 

  Already , Scotland and the All Blacks , the losing World Cup semi-finalists , will be touring Australia and the Wallabies will have to run onto the field without the direction and inspiration of captain Farr-Jones . 

  Farr-Jones , a Wallaby since 1984 and a new father this year , said he will restrict his rugby to club level with Sydney University next season but may return in 1993 . 

  A day to remember for 13-year-old Julian Stewart as he enjoys the ride flanked by Phil Kearns ( left ) and David Campese . 

  " There is a tour of Ireland , Wales and hopefully South Africa at the end of next season and I will not be able to make it . 

  It's too long to be away from home or to have the baby with us and there is also work " , he explained . 

  " It would be wrong for me to play in the Tests against Scotland and the All Blacks and captain the side and not be around when the guys go on tour . 

  So for the sake of selection continuity I will not be playing representative rugby " , he added . 

  Other faces who will be missing are winger Rob Egerton , who will be in the United States where his wife will be studying , while both Steve Cutler and Jeff Miller have announced their retirements . 

  FRANCE 

  ANGLOPHOBIA -- fact or fiction ? 

  As England stormed the battlements of French rugby in the World Cup , the old cry of " Anglo-Saxon conspiracy " was heard again . 

  CHRIS THAU argues that the welter of recriminations and the Dubroca Incident are only the latest instalments in the long-running French obsession ... 

  One of the less savoury aspects of the recently concluded World Cup has been a revival of the old xenophobic clichs . 

  And , if some of the attacks of the Scottish press and public before the England semi-final seemed rather excessive , they pale into insignificance when compared to the Anglophobia that preceded , but mostly followed , the French quarter-final defeat in Paris . 

  The Dubroca incident added insult to an already severely injured state of affairs . 

  This is a worrying phenomenon . 

  and , with the Five Nations Championship around the corner , the issue must be addressed before recrimination and bitterness degenerate into open hostility . 

  There are several reasons for the current situation . 

  One could argue that the poisonous atmosphere in rugby is a rather sad reflection of the vitriolic exchanges between politicians . 

  Anti-British hysteria has always been a politically convenient sidetrack for European politicians . 

  The humourless pronouncements of the French Prime Minister , Edith Cresson , the arm-wrestling contest within the EEC , the " lamb war " guerrillas . 

  They have all played their part in creating a near siege mentality in the French public and media . 

  Nationalism in its crudest forms has always been the ally of the ruthless operator , irrespective of the context -- political , sporting or cultural . 

  It provided simple answers to seemingly intractable questions . 

  But the current levels of Anglophobia in France have a different basis . 

  First and foremost , France have not been playing well . 

  Differences between the two coaches , Jean Trillo and Daniel Dubroca ; disagreements between manager and chief selector Henri Foures -- a man of unchallengeable credentials and integrity -- and his coaches ; the obsessive argument about money among the players , all within a background of the civil war tearing apart French rugby , have compounded an already controversial World Cup build-up . 

  France's meaningless pre-tournament tour to the USA was marred by violence , both against the opposition and within the French squad . 

  Even so , the French might have been able to pull through had the great motivator , Jacques Fouroux , been around . 

  On an emotional day like October 19 , he could have made the difference between success and abject failure . 

  As Jean Trillo rightly observed , this was a Fouroux side without the inspirational Gascon : " They missed him . 

  They are all little Fouroux . 

  They have the nostalgia of his time . 

  The chaps speak like him , react like him " . 

  Naturally , without Fouroux the motivator -- both Trillo and Dubroca are low key , understated individuals -- some of the players felt uneasy and found the extra bit of motivation in the ritual bashing of the English . 

  Mesnel , known for his Anglophobic outbursts , was always at hand with a vitriolic comment about the " perfidious Albion " and what he called " the legendary hypocrisy of the English " . 

  A rather tasteless melange of Wellington and Edith Cresson , Nelson and Trafalgar seemed designed to provide the missing edge and allay the self doubts . 

  France was a side torn apart between Trillo's desire to make risk a factor in the gameplan and Dubroca who , as the spiritual heir to Fouroux , had favoured the safety-first approach , no matter what he may have said in public . 

  The French struggled for nearly sixty minutes against a generous but raw Romania , ran riot against a Fijian side well below par and short of the menacing inspiration that made them a fearsome proposal in 1987 , while the game against Canada exposed the shortcomings that England later exploited with relish . 

  However , despite their obvious inability to concentrate and regain the magic form of the previous Five Nations campaign , the French failed to lower their sights . 

  Defeat was simply not contemplated , hence the bitterness of the aftermath . 

  Besides , while the financial implications of the defeat by England have never been revealed , one can safely assume that the loss has deprived the French players of a fair amount of endorsements and sponsorship . 

  " Imagine the horror ... beaten at the Parc " , L'Equipe magazine said in an editorial . 

  Very seldom in the history of French sport has a national team found itself under an almost moral obligation to win " , said the same editorial . 

  In such circumstances , the only possible explanation of the defeat in the quarter-final was a conspiracy of the English-speaking world against France . 

  The conspiracy theory has always been used to explain away unpopular defeats at the hands of France's Anglo-Saxon neighbours . 

  In this respect , the jingoistic excesses of some of the French newspapers ( Le Figaro in particular ) have been unprecedented . 

  Jacques Fouroux maintained a sane approach when he wrote after the Paris quarter-final : " It's true that since the beginning of the World Cup the refereeing has played a significant role in the outcome of the game , but it would be chauvinistic to say the same about the way Mr. Bishop has refereed . 

  We were wiped out in the scrum and in the line-out . 

  So the English tested Blanco -- that was totally fair and pragmatic " . 

  Dubroca's outburst -- totally out of character for a player recognised for his sense of fair play and a captain admired for his commitment -- though indefensible , was perhaps understandable : the man has been under tremendous pressure since the beginning of the World Cup , and he cracked . 

  In France referees take the stick when one side is on the losing end , and feels , rightly or wrongly , that they could have won . 

  It was not Dubroca's fault that the story gathered momentum and became a headline in the English-speaking media for nearly two weeks while the World Cup bandwagon was still rolling on . 

  It was not the fault of the British journalist either , as Dubroca was led to believe by the French reaction to his outrage . 

  With the honourable exception of L'Equipe , who condemned the incident in no uncertain terms on its front page , the French press had an ambiguous , if not sympathetic , reaction . 

  It was the fault of both World Cup and French Federation officials who showed a lack of sensitivity and insight . 

  Instead of acting instantly in the " greater interested of the game " and convincing Dubroca to do the honourable thing -- which would have cut short the entire argument -- they tried to sweep the story under the carpet . 

  That not only outraged the international media , but it has brought the game into disrepute . 

  French flare : Philippe Sella gets a lecture from referee David Bishop after flattening Rob Andrew with a right-hook during the ill-tempered World Cup quarter-final at Parc des Princes . 

  Dubroca -- a man overwhelmed by the demands of the job -- has accused the British media of pursuing a vendetta against him . 

  He is wrong . 

  The English-speaking media applauded Daniel Dubroca as a player and captain on countless occasions , but still felt duty-bound to criticise him for his arbitration . 

  French ambivalence is the real culprit . 

  At no time did the French Federation issue a statement deploring the behaviour of their national coach . 

  It is no secret that the FFR has been crippled by a protracted civil war , raging with various degrees of intensity for more than a year . 

  On the other hand , Dubroca , even before Fouroux's exit , was one of Albert Ferrasse's favourite sons . 

  It is quite obvious that the old man allowed his emotions to overrule his judgement in this instance . 

  Ferrasse's low-key reaction to the incident contrasted vividly with his robust treatment of Jean-Pierre Garuet after the Lourdes prop was sent off in an international against Ireland a few years ago . 

  In the hope that the dust would settle quickly and the episode be forgotten , the French convinced the World Cup Chairman Russ Thomas to " close the file " , a shabby reaction which outraged press and fans alike . 

  On the other hand , Ferrasse , a shrewd politician and operator , sensed the prevailing mood in France and played the conspiracy card . 

  He criticised the way the selection of referees for the knock-out stages of the World Cup had been made , conveniently ignoring the fact that Ren Hourquet had been selected , only to turn down the appointment . 

  Ferrasse used the word " lepers " to describe the way he felt the " English " treat the French , further heightening the existing tension . 

  As the argument was brought to an end by Dubroca's resignation , Ferrasse enraged his countrymen by revealing that one of the English IRB representatives , Albert Agar , had demanded that Dubroca be brought before the Board to account for his behaviour . 

  Ferrasse , rightly , explained that the former coach has already been punished for his misdemeanour , and he then threatened to resign from the Board unless the Dubroca issue was allowed to rest . 

  Since then , the issue has been rumbling on in the French press , being kept alive for the fast-approaching Five Nations Championship . 

  The ridiculous talk of an anti-French conspiracy -- borrowed from the pages of the political script writers -- is rubbish and should be consigned to the dustbin . 

  One hopes that under the open style of management of the new FFR president , Jean Fabre , France will escape the siege mentality that became the hallmark of the previous administration . 

  No doubt the French World Cup director , Marcel Martin , could contribute to a new level of understanding and co-operation between the feuding neighbours . 

  Logie Bruce Lockhart , the former Scottish international , said in a letter published in a French newspaper : " Do not attach too much importance to the mistakes of the referee ( real or imagined ) or to an Anglo-Saxon plot schemed by the perfidious Albion " . 

  The newspaper felt compelled to answer back and finished with this illuminating piece of wisdom : " Why has Clive Norling , one of the best Anglo-Saxon referees in the world , failed to be selected for the World Cup ? 

  Is it because he speaks French " ? 

  FRENCH CONNECTION 

  Uncivil War 

  DECEMBER 14th is the date of the transfer of power in French rugby . 

  It is the day when Jean Fabre , the president-in-waiting , takes over from the long-serving incumbent Albert Ferrasse . 

  Or rather , when he should take over according to a scenario worked out when the Ferrasse-Fabre coalition was born . 

  Fabre , who had hoped that he could win a clear mandate at the Extraordinary AGM of the French Federation in April has had to compromise and join Ferrasse , until then one of his foremost opponents . 

  The loser in April was a certain Robert Paparemborde , better known to the British public as the prop with sloping shoulders who was very difficult to scrummage against . 

  It appears that Monsieur Paparemborde is an equally difficult political opponent . 

  Though in the minority and benefiting from the support of the partisans of the former national coach Jacques Fouroux , Paparemborde mounted an effective opposition to the Ferrasse-Fabre axis and has emerged as an influential powerbroker . 

  If Fabre wins the vote in the Federation Executive then he will take over , although no one knows for how long . 

  If Paparemborde manages to upset the vote , the Secretary of the Federation , Bernard Lepasset , is the one who could benefit -- though not for long . 

  Seen from this side of the Channel , French rugby politics seem complicated and obscure . 

  They are also very petty . 

  While all the contenders profess great loyalty to French rugby , they have conveniently forgotten that , while they argue , France does not have a coach or a selection panel . 

  It is quite amazing that the opposing factions seem unable to find enough common ground to decide on a coaching appointment . 

  If Fabre takes over , he will appoint Jean-Claude Skrela and Jean-Michel Aquirre as coaches , with Pierre Villepreux as technical director in charge of planning and playing philosophy . 

  Villepreux , however , has a long-term contract with Italian club Benetton Treviso and he is unlikely renege on it unless the French Federation is prepared to match the terms of the deal . 

  This is unlikely , so , if Fabre wins , Villepreux will act as technical guru for Skrela and his friend Aguirre while still coaching Treviso . 

  The chairman of selectors could be Michel Crauste , another former international . 

  If the Paparemborde/ Fouroux/ Lepasset group manages to upset the transition of power , then Pierre Berbizier could be the surprise appointment as national coach . 

  However , if a stalemate occurs , then new elections would seem to be in the offing . 

  Thank goodness France does not start its Five Nations campaign until February 1st , giving them another two weeks to put their house in order . 

  In the dock 

  FRENCH courts are kept busy by rugby players . 

  International prop PHILIPPE GIMBERT from Begls-Bordeaux , a club which had acquired an unsavoury reputation even before they won the French Championship , has been fined FF8,000 ( about 850 ) for damages resulting from a punch in a club match against Rodez in December 1990 . 

  At the receiving end of the violent punch Armand Proietti was severely injured and required surgery . 

  He took Gimbert to court and won . 

  Gimbert was found guilty of inflicting bodily harm according to Paragraph 309 of the French penal code . 

  This is not the first time , nor is it the last that a player will end up in court following a rough exchange with an opponent . 

  What is really worrying is the attitude of the officials concerned . 

  Andre Moga , the president of Begls and one of the so-called " barons " of French rugby , made the following comment : " If Rodez had had a good president at the time this would not have reached court " . 

  The president of Rodez , Philippe Laut , rightly rebuked the Begls man . 

  " We would never have reached this point if the Federation had accepted its responsibility and punished Philippe Gimbert " . 

  In another development , a court in Grenoble found a player from the third-division club Rives-Renage " entirely responsible for the consequence of his lack of direction " , and sentenced him ( and his insurers ) to pay damages of FF923,000 ( about 10,000 ) to his victim Joseph Nieto , the president of the visiting club , Jarrie . 

  Nieto was walking alongside the touchline when a ball kicked from within the field hit him in the face , breaking his glasses . 

  One piece of glass pierced an eye and he lost his sight . 

  The court found the poor kicker guilty . 

  Student World Cup 

  France have commenced preparations for the World Cup ! 

  It is the STUDENTS WORLD CUP which is taking place in Italy this summer . 

  Among those involved in the trials are French internationals Fabien Galthie , Philippe Saint-Andr , and Thierry Lacroix . 

  BEST BOOKS OF THE YEAR 

  Only days to go and you're sweating ? 

  Worry no more about the last-minute presents . 

  Book publishers all over the world have joined the rugby boom , producing a record number of books . 

  STEPHEN JONES ( The Sunday Times ) wades through . 

  Christmas BOOK REVIEW 

  THERE HAVE been a few tactical errors made in the winter lists of new rugby books . 

  Many of the dozens of books that have just been published in the Autumn list were meant to take advantage of the surge of interest caused by the World Cup ; but a few will simply be killed by the rush , lost for ever . 

  However , some gems shine on through and five in particular deserve your investment , for different reasons . 

  The Heinz World Cup book is the only official history of the tournament and will obviously appeal as a keepsake to jog warm memories of a wonderful month in the history of the sport . 

  It is a lavishly illustrated and beautifully laid-out book with contributions from many leading journalists and also from key figures such as David Campese , Rob Andrew , Gavin Hastings , Grant Fox and a host of others . 

  The book has come out in remarkably quick time , a great tribute to Ian Robertson , the editor , who must have beavered away ferociously . 

  The Who's Who is a book of weighty significance masquerading as a fun succession of player profiles compiled from questionnaires sent to the top 350 or so players in the four home countries . 

  On one level , it is vastly entertaining and a rattling good read . 

  On the other hand , this second annual edition scores as mightily as the first in the insight it provides into the thoughts of the top echelon . 

  What emerges ? 

  First , that rugby players are a highly intelligent , dedicated and wise bunch . 

  Second , that any official who ignores them is on dangerous ground . 

  For example , there is a large body of opinion making the obvious point that the scrum-wheeling law is a nonsense . 

  Far more important , roughly 94 per cent of the players who express an opinion on the amateurism question demand action and clarification on the whole issue . 

  If the authorities do not respond to the opinions of the players then they are on dangerous ground and their motives might be questioned . 

  Adedayo Adebayo's suggestion to improve the game should also be given serious consideration . 

  " More drinking " , he says . 

  Bill McLaren's autobiography is a delight . 

  It is warm and informative , human and well-written . 

  Bill is not simply the Saturday voice of Grandstand , owner of the most taken-off tones in sport . 

  As a dedicated PE teacher he played an outstanding part in developing Hawick as a wonderful rugby club and , more than that , his contribution to the image of the game is unsurpassed . 

  He is also superbly crafty in the book in inserting , so gently that the recipient would not even notice , the odd barb . 

  Cornwall , Rugby Champions is a delight of a different sort . 

  It may not quite be a Booker Prize contender is in itself but for the memories it brings back it is a wonder . 

  For me , that marvellous day last season when Cornwall won the County Championship , when Twickenham became a sea of gold and black and when London became Cornwall for the day , is the most vivid of my whole career as a recorder of the game . 

  The Encyclopedia of World Rugby is a monumental effort by Keith Quinn the NZTV commentator . 

  It has thousands of entries on all the aspects of the worldwide game . 

  It looks splendid , it reads well and as a coffee-table volume , worth dipping in to regularly , it is great stuff . 

  Technical 

  Rugby The All Blacks' Way -- J J Stewart ( Crowood Press , Marlborough , Wilts : 9.99 ) . 

  Skilful Rugby Union -- Geoff Cooke ( A &amp;amp; C Black , London : 7.99 ) . 

  Rugby Tactics -- Peter Winder ( A &amp;amp; C Black , London ; 10.99 ) . 

  Rugby -- Fit For The Game by Jim Golby ( Ward Lock , 4.99 ) . 

  Fit For Rugby -- Rex Hazledine &amp;amp; Tom McNab ( Kingswood , 9.50 ) . 

  Mostly slim tomes these . 

  The Hazeldine / McNab partnership has transformed the shape and endurance of England players ; Cooke has transformed the inner man . 

  Anthologies 

  Take the Ball and Run , a rugby anthology -- edited by Godfrey Smith ( Pavilion , London 14.99 ) . 

  Front Runners by Brough Scott ( Victor Gollancz , London , 13.99 ) . 

  Godfrey Smith , a dear colleague and long-serving columnist on the Sunday Times , has provided a much-needed anthology of rugby writings down the years . 

  He has ranged far and wide , amongst the writings of Richard Burton , Richard Llewellyn and P. G . 

  Wodehouse , among many others and also , thankfully , has extracted from Rugby , Body and Soul , that marvellous book on Welsh rugby and life by Bill Samuel . 

  Good reading ( apart from my bit ) . 

  Front Runners the best of Brough Scott's writings in the Sunday Times and Independent on Sunday , is not a rugby book but includes the odd rugby piece . 

  Brough , who has won as many awards as he rode winners in his national hunt career , writes so delightfully because he cares , because he sees sport as a writer and also as a fan . 

  This is some of the best and most fervent writing sport has seen . 

  Autobiographical/ biographical 

  Will Carling : Captain's Diary 1989-91 -- by Will Carling ( Chatto &amp;amp; Windus , 14.99 ) . 

  Carling's England -- The making of the World Cup team by Barry Newcombe ( Harper Collins , London ; 14.99 ) . 

  In Touch -- Rugby , Life Worth Living , by Ian Williams ( Kingswood -- an imprint of Methuen , London ) 14.99 ) . 

  John Gallagher -- the world's best rugby player ? by John Gallagher with Chris Brown ( R&amp;amp;B Publishing , Harrowgate ; 14.95 ) . 

  The difference between self-penned autobiography and biography is that often , the biography scores for comprehensiveness . 

  You can hardly discuss your own strengths and weaknesses without self-consciousness . 

  Will Carling's effort is a good record , although a little too caught up with imagined slights of the press last season . 

  The blurb for Barry Newcombe's book , the story of England's climb to respectability , describes him as one of the game's " sanest analysts " . 

  I suppose that makes the rest of us a little bonkers . 

  Ian Williams , the Wallaby wing , has produced a very fine and worthwhile book , not least because his first-hand experience of rugby in Japan provides a vivid insight . 

  Because of the language barrier and culture shock , such insights are far too rare . 

  Gallagher's book , generally disappointing and uneventful , is a sad monument to a sublime rugby union player who is in the process of failing in his rugby league career . 

  Hopefully , he will pull through although at the moment he is a perfect illustration that rugby league's vaunted reputation for picking talent and making hard-headed business decisions is so much hot air . 

  Historical 

  1905 and All That -- by Gareth Williams ( Gomer Press , Dyfed ; 8.75 ) . 

  Feet , Scotland , Feet -- the book of Scottish Rugby ( Glasgow Herald ) edited by Derek Douglas , with Bill McLaren , Bill McMurtrie , Brian Meek , David Steele ( Mainstream , Edinburgh ; 14.99 ) . 

  The All Blacks -- by Terry McLean ( Sidgwick &amp;amp; Jackson , London : 14.99 ) . 

  English Rugby -- a celebration ( Daily Telegraph ) edited by Ted Barrett ( mainstream , Edinburgh 14.99 ) . 

  Who's Who of Welsh International Rugby Players by John Jenkins , Duncan Pierce , Tim Auty ( Bridge Book , Wrexham : 16.95 ) 

  Major tomes here and each any every one a credit to beavering authors . 

  Gareth Williams " is a heavy yet entertaining sociological study of rugby in Wales , the Scottish effort is more colourful pot pourri than history . 

  The Telegraph's effort is part-history , part extended magazine ; The Welsh Who's Who is a dedicated effort by the authors , with details of every capped Welsh player . 

  Pointless 

  The Unofficial Rugby World Cup Songbook -- collected by Roger Ring ; illustrated by Nerg ( Crazy Books , Edgewood ; 3.99 ) . 

  It's cheap . 

  It would have to be . 

  Perpetuates the dire age of violently sexist songs of an age when rugby should have been ashamed of itself . 

  AUSTRALIA 

  MELBOURNE'S MISSING " LINK " MAKES GOOD 

  The only slight cloud hanging over the Australian World Cup celebrations was the realisation that Nick Farr-Jones would not be there to lead them out in their next match . 

  His decision to take a year off from international rugby has left selectors with the difficult choice of going for a short-term replacement or of opting for long-term continuity . 

  GREG CAMPBELL casts an eye over the principal contenders and comes up with a Victorian prop . 

  The decision by World Cup winning Wallaby captain Nick Farr-Jones to step down from representative rugby in 1992 because of family and business reasons introduces the question : " Who will take over the leadership reins " ? 

  It is a question which will take on a more hard-nosed approach once the euphoria of post-World Cup celebrations die down and the reality of the 1992 season , with the test challenges of Scotland and the All Blacks plus the Wallaby tour of Ireland and Wales and possibly South Africa , arrives . 

  Farr-Jones has not only proven himself to be the world's leading scrum-half , but his captaincy over the past four years has grown in maturity and stature with each test and tour match . 

  Many skippers over-simplify the role of a captain by praising the role of their team-mates and coaching staff . 

  But during the heat of a test match battle , the instantaneous decision by a captain can have an irreversible effect . 

  Take , for instance , Michael Lynagh's courageous decision in Farr-Jones' absence in the Wallabies' quarter-final clash with Ireland at Lansdowne Road when the fighting Irish were three points up with only minutes remaining . 

  Do you elect to go for the drop goal or go for the try ? 

  Lynagh elected to play for the try and history now records his match-winning touchdown in the corner when brilliantly scooping up David Campese's desperate in-field pass . 

  On the basis of this decision along Lynagh , Farr-Jones' deputy for three years , is the worthy and logical successor to the captaincy . 

  Lynagh's credentials are also supported by his role as Queensland captain in 1991 , taking over from former test lock Bill Campbell . 

  But the interesting new question is whether Lynagh's decision to play the closed Australian season with the Benetton club in Italy will prevent him from becoming the new Wallaby skipper . 

  Ewen McKenzie -- Farr-Jones' successor ? 

  It is unlikely the Lynagh will be released from his Italian club duties before May-June , by which time Queensland's season will be in full swing and the Reds will be playing under a new skipper in Lynagh's absence . 

  The unknown factor is whether this absence will force the national selectors to look elsewhere . 

  Simon Poidevin , like Lynagh , has previously led Australia into test battle and will also be a strong candidate for both New South Wales and Australia . 

  But given that Poidevin turned 33 just days before the World Cup final , will the national selectors prefer to look for a long-term leadership continuity as both Australia and England did when appointing Farr-Jones and Will Carling respectively ? 

  So id long-term continuity is what the selectors will look for and if Lynagh's Italian experience rules him out as a contender , who is the man to fill Farr-Jones' vital boots . 

  Tim Gavin , the Wallaby no.8 who missed the World Cup because of a severe knee injury , has both the presence and the respect of both team-mates and opponents plus the international experience to do a most capable job . 

  Hooker Phil Kearns , at only 24 , is undoubtedly going to be around for many years to come and successfully led the Australian under-21 team to victory over New Zealand under 21's four years ago . 

  But the player who could be the surprise nomination is tighthead prop Ewen McKenzie . 

  There are many who dislike the idea of a front-rower calling the shots because the role of their position demands their heads to be down more than up . 

  Since he finally won test honours against France in the domestic series in 1991 McKenzie has established himself as arguably the world's best tighthead prop . 

  Prior to that , he served a very useful apprenticeship when touring with the Wallabies in 1988 and 1989 and , for most part , was the deputy to Andy McIntyre , who is Australia's most capped tighthead prop . 

  Stomach for the fight -- McKenzie shows his credentials in giving his colleagues a helping hand in the line-out during the World Cup final . 

  McKenzie is not a flamboyant character but a deep thinker about rugby and life in general , a worker both on and off the field and a crucial team-member . 

  He is highly respected and is Anthony Herbert's assistant judge in the players' court . 

  He also dispels the belief that front-rowers are a slab of prime beef with granite fists and a thick concrete block resting on their shoulders . 

  As former Wallaby Peter FitzSimons cleverly writes , " McKenzie can not only write the words " cut-out pass " and knows what it is , but he can actually throw one . " 

  McKenzie , who goes by the nickname " Link " , is part of a crucial Wallaby front-row chain in partnership with his Randwick clubmate Kearns and loosehead prop Tony Daly . 

  It is a front-row unit which has provided the solid battlements from which the enterprising Wallaby backs have taken world rugby by storm . 

  If McKenzie ultimately gains the captaincy , it will herald an amazing career as he learned his rugby in the Australian Rules stronghold of Melbourne . 

  During his early teens , McKenzie was a competent soccer player but , as he grew his nimble-footed agility was lost . 

  Then one afternoon at Scotch College , a school-friend asked him to play a game of rugby . 

  And just for the sake of interest , he accepted . 

  Because McKenzie know little or nothing about rugby , the coach tossed him into the front row . 

  McKenzie recalls : " I did not even know where I should stick my head " . 

  Despite these understandable teething problems , McKenzie quickly blossomed as a leading Victoria Schools rugby player and toured the United Kingdom with the state in the early 1980s . 

  In an attempt to further his rugby career , McKenzie loaded up his car and headed north to Sydney and arrived at Randwick . 

  McKenzie initially felt unwelcomed in the unfamiliar surroundings until he saw an old Melbourne friend who introduced him to the irrepressible club coach , Jeff Sayle . 

  " I was about to leave and find another club until I met Jeff " , explained McKenzie . 

  McKenzie was urged to play a season with the Randwick Colts ( under-20 ) and the first player he met was a burly hooker called Kearns , who like Farr-Jones , was unable to win a first XV team berth at prestigious Newington College . 

  McKenzie and Kearns struck up an immediate friendship and prop-hooker understanding and are now the cornerstones of the Randwick , New South Wales and Australian packs . 

  Displaying his sense of humour , McKenzie quipped : " I think I've had my arms around Phil more often than I've had them around my fiancee " . 

  Despite his humble rugby origins in Melbourne , McKenzie quickly learned the lessons in the toughest trade of the game and won Wallaby selection on the tour of England , Scotland and Italy in 1988 where he pressed for test selection . 

  But McIntyre's experience and craft won-over the selectors . 

  A year later , McIntyre was unavailable to tour France and Canada . 

  A test position was certain for the First Test in Strasbourg until he suffered a knee injury and his goal was denied . 

  It was not until France toured Australia in 1990 that he finally won his first cap . 

  In doing so , McKenzie became the first born and bred Victorian to play test rugby since Edward " Weary " Dunlop , a legendary soldier and winner of a V. C. , in 1932 . 

  " To come from Melbourne and play rugby for Australia was something special . 

  If I can do it , I am sure there are plenty of other talented players in Victoria who could do the same " , he said . 

  During the World Cup , McKenzie was much sought after by the Victorian media and public . 

  He handled dozens of radio interviews and wrote a column in the Sunday Age -- a remarkable achievement in itself given the postage stamp size of attention rugby receives in the south . 

  At only 26 and with 16 caps and four Wallaby tours behind him , McKenzie's test future seems assured . 

  And it may not be too long before the question is asked in a game of Trivial Pursuit " who was the last Victorian-born sportsman to captain Australia " ? 

  NEW ZEALAND 

  A BOUQUET OF BARBED WIRE 

  DON CAMERON sifts his way through the ashes of an All Black demise that began well before the loss of the Webb Ellis Cup ... 

  As New Zealanders sifted through the ashes of their World Cup defeat they were beginning to realise that after forming a recipe with which to win the Cup in 1987 they just as surely set up a system which would lead to losing it in 1991 . 

  And , curiously , it took a rugby league man , Graham Lowe , the New Zealander who has been an outstanding coach at home , in England and now in Sydney , to really pin-point the reason why the All Blacks did not retain the Webb Ellis Cup . 

  Lowe was in Auckland promoting a video of his life and times -- inevitably referring to him as a " master coach " which is now becoming one of the more boring sporting clichs -- and was asked what he thought of the All Blacks' failure to bring home the Cup . 

  Lowe quickly made the telling point that whenever he saw film or photographs of the All Blacks they always looked as grim and serious . 

  They had , said Lowe , forgotten that rugby was a game to be enjoyed . 

  It was a simple , but very pertinent observation and re-emphasised that over the last 18 months or so the All Blacks have been steadily squeezed in the nutcracker of their own ambition . 

  The pressure became too much as sponsors , fly-by-nights and average New Zealanders sent them off to the World Cup with the message that all New Zealand expected them to win . 

  The other part of the losing recipe was supplied by the players and the New Zealand Ruby Football Union . 

  In 1988 the team management was set up with John Sturgeon , an austere West Coaster as manager ; Alex Wyllie as coach ; John Mayhew as doctor and David Abercrombie as physiotherapist . 

  Each , in his own way , was something of an expert , especially Mayhew and Abercrombie who also had solid rugby backgrounds . 

  Strained partnership -- Grizz Wyllie ( right ) was never sold on having John Hart as a partner . 

  The management and the team grew together into , in the early stages , a tight-knit organisation . 

  They won in 1988 and they won again in 1989 and they won early in 1990 . 

  They became a very tight , interconnected and self-esteeming group . 

  Too close , as it turned out . 

  The strong Auckland group within the team took up a position of influence . 

  Sturgeon became over-protective of his players to an impossible degree . 

  The use of a local lawyer as the team spokesman after two All Blacks were involved in a post-match scuffle in Llanelli in 1989 did not reflect at all well on Sturgeon's ability as a manager who could stand aside and view the matter dispassionately . 

  Neither did the sending of one or two injured players to Argentina earlier this year reflect well on the team management . 

  It became very much a matter of the old touring buddies looking after each other . 

  Wyllie's limitation as a coach , which had become obvious in 1988 , were glossed over while he and his team were winning . 

  He discarded his captain Wayne Shelford in a rather messy episode in mid-1990 only to find a few months later that Shelford's replacement also had his faults . 

  By the time the Argentinian expedition was over the home critics began to fire their arrows -- and the team put together their shields and hoped the shafts would bounce off . 

  Not all of them did . 

  Grant Fox , for instance , was sorely troubled by the allegations that he had been part of an Auckland spearhead which had had Shelford removed , and that his personal failings had been responsible for the indifferent play in Argentina and the loss of the Sydney Test to Australia . 

  Wyllie came under closer scrutiny by the NZRFU for a variety of reasons -- his unwillingness to have John Hart as an influential coaching partner , his inability to keep to selection announcement timetables and then his rather desperate efforts to have Mike Brewer , the one on-field forward whom Wyllie could rely on for solid advice , put into the team even while suffering a painful foot injury . 

  But while these voices of dissent grew louder and louder , and began to breed that stony-faced aspect about which Lowe later remarked , the New Zealand rugby public were being swept along by the manufactured , hyped-up waves generated by the hucksters and the lackeys determined that their clients would get full return for spending their sponsorship and advertising dollars . 

  The players , who already knew the value of the advertising dollar , were endlessly pumped onto the television advertisements ( most of them in soft focus ) as they mouthed clichs and manufactured statements about what they hoped to do at the World Cup . 

  There were hakas and waving flags , and such high-falutin' gushing that , in comparison , the crusades might have appeared as just a quick trip around the block for a gratifying little scrap . 

  People were shoved into buying this or that , for the benefit of the advertiser and the undying good of New Zealand rugby . 

  This cloying commercial clamour had the New Zealand public wound up . 

  Everyone had the World Cup on their lips , the advertising ratings were very healthy -- even if the structure of a team which had been too long in the comfort-zone was less than robust . 

  The All Blacks worked their way past England in the opening match , but with so many flaws their following matches against Italy and the United States , and then the quarter-final against Canada , were invested with extraordinary importance . 

  These matches were required to show whether the All Blacks tight five were still able to cut the mustard , whether the loose forwards could combine , whether New Zealand could put together a backline attack without having Joe Stanley as the lynch-pin . 

  And all this with made-over wings at fullback . 

  Heavens above . 

  The Americans , Italians and Canadians should have been brushed aside . 

  Yet the All Black confidence and ability to dominate had sunk so low that the three minnows all had parts of the match when they outplayed the All Blacks with embarrassing ease . 

  So the grey-faced All Blacks , the man who had forgotten they were playing a game , went to Dublin and played with the verve of men on their way to the gallows . 

  Men on their way to the gallows ? 

  Fitzpatrick and Fox turn away as Campese scores in Dublin . 

  The team were still wrapped together in the comfort zone of a four-year period when each had cosseted and protected the other . 

  No-one had noticed that while they huddled together the armour-plating had rusted away . 

  Losing the William Webb Ellis Cup was bed enough for the NZRFU on the eve of its 100th birthday . 

  Losing most of the All Black team a few days later was even more embarrassing . 

  Yet only a few days after the Wallabies had tucked the Cup safely away , as they thoroughly deserved to do , NZRFU officials were bustling about trying to find out what their players were up to . 

  In recent years the habit of the All Blacks leaving together and returning together after a trip to Europe has disappeared . 

  Some players have remained for the northern winter in England , France or Italy , to pursue the loose change of world rugby . 

  Others have had holidays . 

  But this year the All Blacks broke new ground . 

  They obtained permission from the NZRFU for most of them to drift away from Twickenham and eventually to arrive in the northern Italian town of Treviso . 

  There would band together to play a charity match and a few days afterwards attend the wedding of John Kirwan to a young lady of Treviso . 

  Perhaps the terms of reference were slightly vague , but the NZRFU probably considered that their lads deserved a break , and so gave general permission for the expedition to Italy . 

  So everyone drifted off , apart from Eddie Tonks , the NZRFU council chairman , who remained in London for the International Board meeting . 

  Then came the uncomfortable news that the All Blacks' opposition in Treviso would involve some South African players . 

  Even now no-one seems quite certain whether this was a fact , a half-fact or the product of a fertile imagination . 

  But , like all rumours , it grew and flourished . 

  For a start , Naas Botha , the Springbok wonderboot , would play against the New Zealanders . 

  They two or three other itinerant South Africans would be involved . 

  Within a day or two it appeared that a complete South African team would be fielded and Treviso might just see the start of rugby's World War III . 

  With everyone else gone Tonks had to fend for himself so he tried to find out the truth . 

  Eventually he reached Kirwan and was assured that no South Africans would be involved and that the match has some sanctity as the proceeds were to go to child cancer research -- not that that dissuaded some cynics from suggesting that some players may have taken their share . 

  Tonks has for months been juggling the possibility of an All Black tour to South Africa next year -- something close to his heart -- but was aware that the continuing divisions between the rugby groups in the Republic made such a tour impossible . 

  Tonks feared that the All Blacks playing a South African XV at Treviso would so widen the gap in South Africa that future combination might almost be impossible . 

  0 

  So Tonks was able to rest easy that no South Africans would play at Treviso . 

  But not for long . 

  For very soon , cam the news that the wandering band of All Blacks had come to earth in Vichy , France , and had played a match against a French selection . 

  About the time this match took place , Tonks was in the IRB meeting room alongside the French delegate and was not impressed that they had not made him aware of the game -- if they in fact knew about it . 

  Tonks was incensed about the Vichy venture , as were the NZRFU folk at home , everyone was embarrassed that they had no way of knowing where the All Black party were , what was involved in the game , and where next the travelling group might surface . 

  The NZRFU rather prides itself on its official-player liaison , of treating its players handsomely , and it rather hopes that they in turn would treat the NZRFU with courtesy , if not affection . 

  So the NZRFU saw the French venture as a snub , a slight on the NZRFU administration . 

  There was not much else they could do . 

  The NZRFU , predictably , sent off a " please explain " letter to the French Federation , asking who had arranged the match , whether the players had received financial reward , and so forth . 

  Just as predictably , the immediate French reaction seemed to be a silent Gallic shrug of the shoulders . 

  After some silence the NZRFU sent off another rocket to the French Federation . 

  At the time of writing the French reaction was , predictably , again the same . 

  Possibly because the French Federation may actually know nothing about the game . 

  Back home the NZRFU critics regarded the Vichy venture as another sign that the NZRFU was losing its control of its leading players . 

  Andy Haden said , from far away on a local radio programme , that the Vichy-Treviso jaunt was just another part of the growing player-power . 

  Haden sounded just a little off-key about the whole affair . 

  It was just the sort of nose-thumbing exercise toward the NZRFU that Haden would loved to have devised and put in action . 

  And here was someone else stealing his rebellious thunder . 

  While the middleweights were sparring away , the heavyweights of the All Black selector-coach battle were staying in their corners . 

  Nominations for the three All Black selectors closed on November 27 . 

  The NZRFU council was due to appoint the selectors on December 14 . 

  Alex Wyllie and John Hart were both exhausted after the rigours of the World Cup and the constant press bombardment . 

  Hart has formally been nominated by the Auckland union , but he has informed Auckland and several other unions who support him that he wants more time to decide whether he really wants the toil and trouble of being the All Black coach . 

  Wyllie , on the point of launching his biography which immodestly refers to him as " The Legend , " says he no longer wants the job and has not let his name be put forward . 

  The odds are that the NZRFU will be happier now that Wyllie has decided not to stand . 

  But this does not mean Hart is a certainty . 

  Hart has attracted some sharp criticism , especially from Otago and southern parts of the South Island . 

  They have put forward their nine-year coach Laurie Mains , and are winding themselves up to the point of wanting him as coach , first-up . 

  Other nominees are Ross Cooper , who helped Romania during the World Cup , Peter Thorburn , after seven years with North Harbour , and the wondrous Wellington duo of Earl Kirton and Andy Leslie . 

  Kirton spent a year as an All Black selector when Hart was out of favour and now seems embroiled in a television commentary career which largely involves tearing strips from the referee and running a one-man coaching clinic at the same time . 

  Leslie , the former All Black captain , took over the Wellington team some time after Kirton departed that job . 

  Wellington could not make up its mind , so nominated both . 

  A long-shot bet at the moment could have Mains ( coach ) Leslie and Thorburn as the 1992 panel . 

  CANADA 

  BIRTWELL'S HAPPY BAND 

  PETER McMULLAN talked to coach IAN BIRTWELL , the former Englishman who took Canada from also-rans to the success story of the World Cup . 

  While individual players have rightly been singled out for special mention , the very considerable success of Canada's World Cup campaign was based on a concerted team effort . 

  It's this thought that remains uppermost in the mind of coach Ian Birtwell as he looks back on those sixteen memorable days in October when Canada came charging so boldly from the ranks of the " possibles " to achieve quarter-final status . 

  " All my high points are related to the team effort , the commitment the lads showed on the field and to their ability to play for 80 minutes against top quality opposition . 

  If there is to be any criticism of our play , it is in relation to our tactical awareness , to the fact that we sometimes made wrong choices which more experienced people would not have made " . 

  As an example , Birtwell cites the New Zealand game in Lille , when the Canadian backs were given the balls in situations when the pack had stopped going forward . 

  " That was a fundamental error " , he says . 

  In the context of what Canada achieved -- solid victories over Fiji and Romania , a six-point loss to France in a game that most Canadians feel could just as well have provided another win , and , finally , defeat by New Zealand and a heart-stirring two-try finish -- Birtwell and his squad have good reason to be satisfied . 

  As he says : " The first game against Fiji was very important to us and the first try we scored ( by fullback Scott Stewart on a return pass from left wing Steve Gray ) was incredibly important . 

  " It was done with such proficiency , with all the components working well ... a counter-attack situation , driving play , back-up support , excellent passing , good body positions going into contact . 

  That to me was one of the most rewarding moments over and above when we got into the big game against New Zealand . 

  " What we have done over the past two years is to improve on our ability to retain the ball in contact , to drive very successfully as units ( as the All Blacks found to their cost in Lille ) and to deep those drives going . 

  The drives we put on against New Zealand were things that we had worked on and it was very satisfying to see them coming off , not just for the forwards but for the backs as well . 

  Fifteen people working together against some very talented opposition " . 

  While Birtwell , who is a fisheries research scientist with the Canadian government in Vancouver , has still to decide whether or not he can continue to devote the time needed to coach the national team , he has no doubts as to what the future holds . 

  " I think Canada will do very well over the next four years . 

  We have set the platform for things to move ahead . 

  The challenge will be to get consistent , good quality opposition and to have these Canadian players , or people like them , coming together regularly . 

  Obviously we are losing some players to retirement , and other who are planning to play elsewhere , and we are going to have to bring in new people . 

  Against this loss we still have those players who sat out and who are very close to the standard of the team that played " . 

  Ian Birtwell ( front left ) with his happy Canucks ( l-r ) Rob Van den Brink , Norm Hadley , Gareth Rees , John Robertsen , John Graf , Chris Tynan and Mark Wyatt . 

  Birtwell sees the challenge facing the Canadian Rugby Union just now centred on the need to bring the new faces in early and quickly . 

  " Give them suitable opposition that will help in their development towards the next World Cup . 

  Not too great a challenge right now , but a development programme to build up confidence , the ability to play at the highest level . 

  " We did it well this time , I think , and there was a progressive build-up , not a sudden challenge . 

  For example , we did not go to Australia in July . 

  That would have been a mistake . 

  Instead , we prepared with a series of games at the local level here in B. C. " . 

  Canada's selection policy came as a surprise to many observers , with changes made in the side that defeated Fiji in preparation for Romania and yet again in a winning team for the final pool game against France . 

  Again the decisions were based on sound judgement , the depth of the Canadian squad a Birtwell's own coaching philosophy . 

  " In all games I coach I never go in with the understanding that there is only one person for one position . 

  Even at the club level I have always tried to bring in people from lower divisions because , sooner or later , the people playing low down will get higher up -- some , not all of them . 

  " We have had the same situation over the last two years with the Canadian squad . 

  We have endeavoured to give people who are very similar in talent the opportunity to play , so what we did in France was not difficult . 

  We had a squad and we picked according to what we wanted to do on the day . 

  It showed our system worked and it certainly was not a brave decision to make those changes . 

  " Nor was it a high risk situation from my point of view , because for these were tried and tested individuals we were putting on the field . 

  It may have come as a surprise to some , especially those nations where they have a fixed XV to which they only add as time goes by " . 

  Birtwell acknowledges that there are advantages to having a settle side , but he also pinpoints what he sees as great drawbacks to this approach . 

  " When some of the XV disappear through injury or some other reason it means that , all of a sudden , you are dealing with a new player who has to be parachuted in and the pressure on the individual is acute . 

  With us , if you can alleviate that pressure in advance then so much the better " . 

  NEWFOUNDLAND -- PROVINCIAL CHAMPIONSHIP SUCCESS STORY 

  It's a far cry from Lille , World Cup excitement , the All Blacks and a crowd of well over 30,000 to an open field on the University of Victoria campus where BRITISH COLUMBIA opened its defence of the Canadian Senior Provincial Championship , on November 9 and 10 . 

  Although only eight of the 23 British Columbia players who went to the World Cup were on hand for the two games it was enough to see the host province safely through to championship no.23 by virtue of wins over Alberta -- and that was a close call indeed -- and NEWFOUNDLAND . 

  The story of the weekend was most certainly the success of the team that travelled the full vast width of the country to emerge as only the second-ever to represent Newfoundland in the final . 

  In the first semi-final they took Ontario completely unawares with a dashing try in the opening minutes by centre Greg McKinney which his partner Dennis Clarke converted for a 6-0 advantage . 

  It proved enough for a most handsome victory over decidedly off-colour Ontario and it was an enormous pity that Rod Snow , the dynamic Newfoundland no.8 , sustained a neck injury that kept him out of the final . 

  B. C. , who won the 27th final 35-3 , were thankful to be ahead by three penalties to one at the interval against a Newfoundland XV that showed a little respect for a line-up that included World Cup players in Dan Jackart , Ron Vanden Brink , Jeff Knauer , Roy Radu , Steve Gray and Tom Woods . 

  Prop Paul Szabo , who had done so well against New Zealand in Lille when Jackart was injured , was on hand for the opening match with Alberta along with flanker Bruce Breen , who had the misfortune to break a bone in his wrist . 

  B. C. won this semi-final 18-16 , four penalties and a goal to four penalties and a try , and could have been eliminated had Troy McDonald , the Alberta outside-half , been successful with a difficult drop goal in the final minutes . 

  British Columbia's forward strength and willingness to work the ball wide in the second half , as injury-hit Newfoundland , tired , brought five tries , two of them pushovers for the expected result . 

  No.8 Colin McKenzie , who excelled with 40 tries for BC Old Boys last season , had three scores , including the pushover efforts , with the others claimed by wing Steve Gray and centre Ron Towes . 

  Outside-half Bob Ross showed his worth as a kicker , supplying three penalties and three of five conversions while Clarke kicked Newfoundland's single penalty . 

  Alberta , who had played so well on the Saturday , were beaten 14-6 by Ontario in the third-place game the next day and , while the winners looked a lot more together than they had against Newfoundland , they definitely suffered throughout from the absence of their outstanding flanker , Al Charron , ruled out by a World Cup rib injury . 

  Five members of Canada's World Cup squad , including four who played in the final game against New Zealand in Lille , will be proving their worth overseas in the coming months . 

  Lock Norm Hadley and no.8 Glenn Ennis , two of the mainstays of Canada's increasingly impressive forward effort this year , have gone to Japan to accept appointments in the international marketing department of the Suntori Corporation , a major brewing company . 

  They expect to be in Japan for two years and will thus be eligible to play for Suntori in the national championship next season . 

  The business experience will be invaluable , especially in an era when Canada is setting high priority on Pacific Rim links , with their first priority coming to terms with the language . 

  Monty Heald ( Ontario ) , a former national team manager and selector , is the new President of the Canadian Rugby Union . 

  He succeeds Alberta's Barry Giffen who stepped down after four years at the annual general meeting held in Victoria on the weekend of the national championships in early November . 

  Heald is replaced as director responsible for national teams by Keith Wilkinson ( Quebec ) with Ieuan Evans ( Alberta ) , who follows Mike Hutchinson ( B. C. ) , the only other new member of the board . 

  Continuing appointments were those of Jan Curnow ( B. C. ) referees and laws ; Mike Dinning ( Ontario ) coaching and certification ; Rick Graham ( Nova Scotia ) youth and national championships ; Jo Reinbold , women's rugby , and Alan Sharp ( B. C. ) treasurer and deputy president . 

  Sharp was also appointment to be Canada's delegate to the IRFB for the next two years . 

  Fullback and captain Mark Wyatt , who 29 caps in 10 years is just two fewer than the Canadian record set by lock Ro Hindson between 1973 and 1990 , was not the only one to retire after the World Cup . 

  Hooker David Spiers , who played against Fiji and New Zealand , has called it a day long with lock John Robertsen , who was injured against France after appearing in the opening win over Fiji . 

  Reserve flanker Roy Radu will continue at club level but will not seek to add to his total of twelve caps . 

  USA 

  Blowing the big chance 

  The World Cup hardly caused a ripple Stateside . 

  The Final will not make it onto American TV screens until four months after the event . 

  RANDALL LIEBERMANN explains why ... 

  While participating in the second Rugby World Cup was a great learning experience for the United States national team ( despite a 0-3 record and being outscored 113-24 ) , for US rugby this recent World Championship was a promotional disappointment . 

  The failure of TSL , the London-based World Cup broadcast management company , to get adequate television coverage of the event in the United States was potentially very damaging to the future of US rugby . 

  In these recessionary times , and with USA rugby currently without a major sponsor , the airing of ITV's excellent programmes might have stirred the American general public's interest in rugby . 

  Sponsorship money does not grow on trees in the States . 

  Only by convincing companies that there's a mass audience interested will any significant sponsorships materialise for US rugby . 

  Television exposure is the most significant outlet for this exposure in the United States , but rugby was only ranked 103rd out of 114 spectator sports in a recent survey by the Sports Marketing Group of Dallas , Texas . 

  So , with such an attractive product as the Rugby World Cup available , it was extremely important that TSL secure as large and widespread a viewing audience as possible . 

  They failed on both counts . 

  The phones began ringing off the hook at Rugby US a few months before the World Cup began , with callers wanting to know when and where they could see the matches on television . 

  No-one in the United States Rugby Union had a clue about coverage and neither the union nor the magazine was ever sent a press release . 

  After a dozen or so phone calls , we finally discovered that TSL had secured coverage on Sportschannel America , a national cable sports network which reaches approximately nine million households . 

  Unfortunately , the Sports-channel package consists of 17 weekly , one-hour highlight shows , with the national feed on Saturday mornings at 10am ( wedged in with the children's cartoons ) . 

  The programmes did not even start until Saturday morning on October 26th , around the very same time that fly-half Rob Andrew was clinching England's 9-6 victory over Scotland in the first semi-final . 

  And Australia's 12-6 victory over England in the final will not be aired in the US until nearly four months after it was played . 

  This scenario would be bad enough if Sportschannel America was the only network willing to air the event in the States . 

  But it was not . 

  John Morgan , the producer of a weekly rugby programme airing on the Prime Network ( with 23 million subscribers -- 14 million more than Sportschannel ) , indicated he had offered TSL coverage on his " Rugby World " show , which has slots on Saturday and Sunday afternoons and early evenings . 

  Morgan said he never got a reply from the English company . 

  Morgan also claimed that TSL paid Sportschannel around 1,750 per show for air time , while his offer was for free . 

  Furthermore , Pete McEwan , head of international production for TV New Zealand related a similar story . 

  McEwan's company was bringing the live World Cup feed to New Zealand through Los Angeles and also sold the feed for all 32 games into Canada . 

  " We offered TSL a live feed for the US market at a cost of $1,000 per show , but they never got back to us " , said McEwan . 

  " I think TSL did a very poor job of selling this World Cup " . 

  Although some US rugby enthusiasts were able to tap into these satellite transmissions to view the matches live , the majority have not seen the heroics of the best players in their sport . 

  And , without television coverage to keep them honest , US newspaper and sports magazine editors once again chose to ignore the World Championship of one of the world's most popular sports . 

  Most dishearteningly , Sports Illustrated , the country's premier sports magazine , sent over ex-Patriot Clive Gammon ( who I talked to at the US-New Zealand and England matches ) but not one line has appeared in the magazine yet . 

  The Sports Illustrated issue after the World Cup final , however , did include stories on a disabled powerlifter , off-track betting parlours in France and a youth chess club in Harlem . 

  But it had no room for rugby's World Cup . 

  It was quite a disturbing scenario for anyone interested in promoting US rugby and greatly set back our efforts . 

  Hopefully , the organisers of the 1995 Rugby World Cup will learn from this public relations disaster and make television coverage in the United States , the world's biggest market , more of a priority . 

  Eagles eyrie : Playing to an empty house across The Pond . 

  SOUTH AFRICA 

  THE CASE FOR THE DEFENCE 

  The'Boks may be ring rusty but , says JOHN ROBBIE , they are top-heavy with talent and anyone who writes them off does so at their peril ... 

  It was Charles Caleb Colton who said that man is an embodied paradox , a bundle of contradictions . 

  I am not sure about that but I am sure that the relative strength of a South African side is the subject of heated debate all over the rugby world and , depending on who you speak to , the " Boks are either the true World Champions or a collection of dinosaurs , hopelessly out of touch with the modern game and in for a rude awakening . 

  It's extraordinary to be sitting in the middle and listening to the different sides of the argument . 

  Who would want to be a juror at the Trial of South African Rugby ? 

  Exhibits A and B are the Rugby World Cup and the Currie Cup Final . 

  Both had their moments and , for the first time , both were shown all around the world on television . 

  Both received praise for the presentation , the colour and the crowds but mixed reviews when it came to the standard of play . 

  With South African Rugby in the dock the Council for the Defence would point to the record of the Springboks . 

  They demolished England in 1984 , comprehensively beat an excellent Cavaliers side in 1986 ( with neutral referees ) and , despite the years of isolation , managed to defeat , admittedly with some difficulty , the FNB world side that toured in 1989 . 

  Since then a number of really promising youngsters have emerged and most South Africans feel that the mid-nineties will be the peak of an outstanding generation , as was the case with 1986 . 

  The Prosecution would point to the 1991 Currie Cup Final and ask for some evidence of the power of South Africa . 

  The game should have been a classic but clearly was not . 

  It was grippingly exciting , sure , but the handling was disappointing , there was a lot of kicking and , perhaps of greatest concern , was the poor quality of both side's ball retention . 

  Time and time again one of the sides went into a contact situation with the ball and lost it to the opposition . 

  This rarely happened in the World Cup , even when a minnow played against a giant . 

  There's a lot of truth in the criticism and South African supporters at the World Cup who dismissed all the sides as sub-standard would do well to take note of it . 

  However , just look at the way that refereeing has influenced certain facets of the international game . 

  Ruthless penalising of malingerers and also of sides going over the top has brought about a quiet revolution . 

  Attacking sides can now repeatedly drive and place the ball safe in the knowledge that , providing support is there , possession will be retained . 

  This applies to backs as well as forwards and centres have become , once again , key players in the strategy of committing opponents and then moving the ball wide . 

  This style will suit the " Boks to a tee . 

  Wahl Bartmann , Tiaan Strauss , Jannie Breedt and Ian MacDonald of the forwards and centres such as Pieter Muller and Jannie Classen will revel in this approach , as will all of the very physical players who make up the game here . 

  The " Boks will love it . 

  South Africans were very disappointed by the attacking limitations displayed in RWC 1991 . 

  Ask yourself how many times an attacking fullback burst into the line to release his outside runners . 

  In the big clashes it was a rare sight . 

  Three fullbacks Andre Joubert , who played so well at Murrayfield , Gerbrand Grobler and Hendrik Truter , are attacking players who can scythe through defences from set and broken play . 

  They recognise that they are the only unmarked players on the field and , as such , the key attackers . 

  Surely with one of these at fullback both England and Australia would have been far stronger units . 

  Indeed , although their tactics were laudable , how many times did the England backline movement really look like succeeding in the Final ? 

  It makes you think . 

  The line-outs are also an area of concern . 

  Gone are the days when a South African lock will rise like a Saturn Five , defying gravity for what seemed like an eternity , to pluck the ball two-handed and present it to the lucky scrum-half . 

  Unfortunately South Africans have had to adopt the shambles of the international line-out . 

  It's a pity the world did not adopt the early binding interpretation of the old South Africa , but there you are . 

  However , those who know South African rugby will appreciate that the more physical and confrontational the forward exchanges , the more the local forwards will love it . 

  What is the overall point ? 

  The point is that there are areas in the South African game where standards have clearly fallen behind the rest of the world . 

  However , these limitations are far from unsurmountable . 

  Like the Japanese with their physical problem , the Fijians with their attitude to the fifteen-man game and perhaps Wales , Scotland and Ireland with their limited resources of top-flight players , the South Africans have minor challenges in adaptation and practice . 

  On the topic of resources , it's interesting that a player like Harry Roberts , who made Scotland " B " and played with distinction for a number of top clubs , plays for Transvaal but would be fighting against top opposition for a third or fourth place in the hooker rankings in South Africa . 

  Given the size and athleticism of the players here , the fanatical will to re-emerge as a world power and the fact that countries are queuing up to give the " Boks experience , then the message is clear . 

  Write off the " Boks at your peril . 

  One man who will never wear the colours of South Africa is Jan Lock . 

  He was chosen as tight-head for the " Boks against the FNB side in 1989 but injured himself on that same day and never got the elusive cap . 

  His was a similar case to that of Emmet O'Rafferty who was chosen for Ireland in the late seventies but never played . 

  He was also desperately unlucky . 

  Jan was making a comeback this season and played in the curtain-raiser to the Currie Cup Final . 

  He retired before the end , collapsed in the dressing room and passed away . 

  The whole country was stunned and the collective grief is a testimony to his popularity . 

  Allegations of steroid abuse were made and publication of the post-mortem results have been delayed . 

  Jan Lock , an iron man on the field , a family man and a friendly comedian off it , was 28 . 

  He will be sorely missed . 

  Let us end with a look at a player who will certainly come into " Bok contention in the years to come : Ian McDonald . 

  In fact , he played in the end-of-season " Bok versus Junior " Bok game in Durban . 

  This was an interesting exercise as the main side played in full colours but were awarded no caps . 

  They saw off a spirited junior challenge , at times in style . 

  Ian McDonald is 23-years-old . 

  He stands about 6ft 4ins and weighs almost sixteen stone . 

  Two seasons ago he was rated tenth best tighthead flanker in the country . 

  This season he has been a revelation . 

  He wins a lot of ball in the line-outs and as such is a useful character to have at top level , in tandem with a big no.8 . 

  He is surprisingly quick for such a big man and his tackling is extremely aggressive . 

  He plays for the Rand Afrikaans University in Johannesburg and is a certainty for Transvaal . 

  With Jannie Breedt and the mercurial Francois Pienaar he makes up a back row that is ideally suited to the type of game South Africa will need to play to beat the best in the world . 

  He could well be to South Africa what Willie-O now is to the World Champions . 

  Incidentally , lest any Scots are looking for replacements for their back row , Ian is as Afrikaans as the " Bok of days gone by who , when asked about language difficulties in France , replied that two expressions were all that was necessary : " Parlez-vous and Kamer toe " ( Afrikaans for " to the room ? " ) ! 

  Transvaal flanker Ian McDonald -- a revelation 

  AROUND THE WORLD 

  Bermuda becomes socially serious 

  As Andy Haden , captain and cook of the New Zealand party at this year's Classics tournament explained : " Being socially serious and seriously social " is a demanding business . 

  No sooner had they arrived in Bermuda than there was the stern challenge of the Irish to be met on the field , a barbecue to be arranged , the All Black cabaret act to be sorted out , the necessary mopeds to be booked , and the'91 brew of the " Dark and Stormy " to be tested . 

  They just sit back and relax . 

  An All Black relax ? 

  You must be kidding ! 

  They were at the World Classics to win since those upstart Aussies already had one major tournament to boast about this year , and they were not getting their hands on this one . 

  " I'd prefer this one anyway " , said Haden . 

  Hence the rumours of in-camera , pre-Bermuda fitness screenings of the over thirty-five-year-olds . 

  The Aussies , under the guidance of Andy Slack ( " out best entertainment has nothing at all to do with rugby " ) quickly got to grips with their imported beer after the disappointment of losing to a late Welsh try in one of the opening games . 

  With likes of Ken Wright , Roger Gould and Enrique Rodriguez ( nice bow tie , Rico ) , they threw the beer cans away and ran some beauts . 

  " It does not get any easier " , confessed Slack , a theme reiterated by quite a few during the competition , especially those playing from memories of yesteryear glories . 

  The " Dark and Stormy " -- a local mixture of rum and ginger beer -- was an apt description of the conditions for this marvellous event . 

  Under the newly constructed lights at the National Sports Ground , the players ignored the elements and hangovers to provide truly entertaining and competitive rugby . 

  You do not expect players to be warned for excessive aggression at this level , but they were , and the first to be admonished was an old hand at listening to finger pointing lectures . 

  His name ? 

  None other than Paul Ringer , pirate of the Welsh fancy dress night and frustrated crooner of their cabaret act . 

  Mike Roberts and company provided the very original humming choral backing . 

  It was not immediately evident from some camps whether the idea was to continue in a serious vein of rugby competition or subject themselves to the physical demands of the concentrated social calendar . 

  The Irish began their serious training ( for the social tournament ) in New York and never quite recovered ) . 

  The States contributed some fine tries but kept their finest hour to a rendition ( it did not matter about the multiplicity of keys ) of " American Pie " . 

  The hosts , and what a superbly organised lot they were , with the help of few French travellers , gave a good account of themselves , notably against the tiring Irish . 

  In the semi-finals the Welsh lost to England , which gave the English a bit of a problem . 

  How serious should skipper and ITV pundit Steve Smith tell his men to take the final against New Zealand ? 

  The decision was to retire to a private island and bar , give the mike to Mike Rafter and leave the rest to changing-room adrenalin . 

  Bill " Running Bear " Cuthbertson and his braves from Scotland did themselves proud in the semi-final against New Zealand , even better was an untransmittable version of the Highlands " Haka " . 

  Yet when the final came around , frivolity -- England sang " Look on the bright side of life " in response to the " Haka " -- gave way to an enthralling forward battle with the All Blacks giving way to no-one . 

  They achieved what they had set out to do , and so the thirty-six hour homeward journey would be that more tolerable . 

  Going round in circles -- the Scots try to outflank the NZ Haka . 

  HONG KONG 

  SPRINGBOKS SEVENS TRIP SCUPPERED 

  South Africa was the team that everyone -- from organisers , the public , to the media -- wanted to see at the 1992 Hong Kong Sevens . 

  But any hopes of seeing the Springboks were , however , dashed when the Republic's two rugby bodies failed to unite under a sole administration in time . 

  The failure of Danie Craven's South Africa Rugby Board and the mainly-black South Africa Rugby Union to get their act together forestalled grandiose plans by the Hong Kong Seven organisers to use their world-famous event as the door through which the Springboks would make their re-entry into the rugby world . 

  " Like many of you , I hoped that South Africa would be playing here next year . 

  But it is not to be " , said a disappointed Don Watson , chairman of the Hong Kong Rugby Football Union . 

  Watson's lament might have been couched in Shakespearian speech . 

  But it was apt . 

  The Hong Kong Sevens had tried desperately to attract the team that has a lure more powerful than any single rugby side in the world today . 

  The organisers responded to the possible lifting of sporting restrictions on South Africa by reserving a place in the 24-team line-up when invitations were sent out in June this year . 

  For several months the Hong Kong Sevens waited , hoping that the country's two rugby bodies would unite as quickly as they had in some other sports -- most notably cricket . 

  But while their cricketing cousins were making history at the Calcutta Eden Garden pitch , rugby was still embroiled in the hard world of politics . 

  With no hint that unification was soon forthcoming , the Sevens' organisers sent their invitation elsewhere , and despite the absence of the Springboks , the April 4-5 tournament will still see some new faces . 

  They may not be in the same class as the Springboks , but Namibia and Romania will be as heartily cheered by the tournament's crowd when they make their appearances next year . 

  As for South Africa -- it will have to be 1993 . 

  " Given the uncertainty of the situation , and the need to progress with organising next year's tournament , we decided to put South Africa's participation on hold for another year " , said an exasperated Watson . 

  So everyone will have to settle for Namibia and Romania , who will make a refreshing change but are not expected to challenge the Southern Hemisphere stranglehold on this tournament . 

  Missing from the last tournament are Scotland , because of a hectic domestic schedule , and Spain and the Soviet Bears , who both stand down automatically after a two-year run . 

  France are the only member of the Five Nations to accept an invitation , although it can be expected to see a number of England's high-order in the Barbarians side and Irish charm amongst the Irish Wolfhounds . 

  The dates of the draw for the 1992 event will be February 20 . 

  The Classics is here to stay . 

  It is a massive undertaking for the organisers ( and their livers ) . 

  For those who have participated this year the diaries have been filled ... 

  Bermuda World Classics 1992 , Nov 7th-15th . 

  DUBAI 

  Queensland too hot to handle 

  As if beating England and supplying half of the World Cup winning side was enough for one year Queensland also won the 22nd Dubai . 

  While Oman's Muscat took on the mantle of regional champions , Queensland provided a masterly performance against Bahrain Warblers . 

  The only two unbeaten sides , Warblers and Queensland , met in what was probably the best final ever seen at the tournament . 

  A first-half try by Queensland flier Paul Carozza was quickly countered by Warbler Eric Rush and despite Rush adding a second , Carozza scorched across the sand pitch to bring the Australians back to 10-8 before completing his hat-trick . 

  When Queensland eventually ran out 20-14 winners . 

  Hot-shots ! 

  Harvey Thorneycroft on the move for Millfield O. B .'s as the take on Toulouse . 

  International Crossroads with Chris Thau 

  Russians out in the cold 

  AFTER their successful World Cup outing , ITALY recommenced their FIRA campaign last month in Moscow . 

  The Italians beat the Soviets 23-3 on a freezing cold day at the Fili Stadium in Moscow , the first ever Italian in the Soviet Union . 

  The Soviets fielded a young and relatively inexperienced side and , as always , showed tremendous athleticism and an appetite for combat . 

  However , their technical know-how does not match their physical prowess . 

  The Italians scored four tries to none -- one each from Venturi and their captain Pivetta and two by electric winger Marcello Cuttitta . 

  " They put us under tremendous pressure . 

  It is a raw side but very promising , commented his brother , prop Massimo Cuttitta . 

  The Italians who , under Bertrand Foucarde , have rediscovered the art of tackling , defended beautifully and counter-attacked dangerously . 

  The Soviet side , deprived of the services of their veteran trio Mironov , Tikhonov and Frantzusov , seem to have lost steam lately . 

  In fact , a couple of weeks later the Soviets , a Russian/ Khazakstan selection in everything but name , managed to survive a spirited Spanish challenge in Seville with a last-minute try by centre Konovalenko , converted by fly-half Nikolaev . 

  With two minutes to go , Spain were leading 16-12 but careless defence -- perhaps a premature relaxation -- allowed the Russians to snatch a precious win for their survival in the FIRA First Division . 

  The Soviets scored three tries ( Zacharliuk , Negodin and Konovalenko ) to Spain's two ( Fidel Castro -- no relation -- and Pablo Guierez ) . 

  Spain led 9-7 at half-time . 

  Canucks go east 

  CANADIAN World Cup stars Glenn Ennis and Norm Hadley have turned down lucrative offers from several French clubs to join Japanese club Toshiba instead . 

  Hadley , who holds joint French-Canadian nationality , was a particularly hot pick for the French . 

  The Nice club had flown the 6ft 9in giant for their training camp in August , but failed in their attempt to sign him on . 

  Japan has joined the international club circus recruiting players of international calibre for their domestic competition . 

  Gareth Rees , the gifted Canadian fly-half has already signed for the French club Merignac , a side captained by Philippe Berbizier , the brother of Pierre . 

  Italian frontrunners 

  MILANO and Treviso are the leading contenders for the ITALIAN CHAMPIONSHIP title . 

  Milano , sponsored by media magnate Berlusconi , are coached by Mark Ella and are the current title holders . 

  Their line-up features a host of stars -- from the Cuttitta brothers to the gifted Italo-Argentine Diego Dominguez . 

  The foreign player in the team is World Cup superstar David Campese . 

  Treviso , sponsored by the Benetton family empire , are coached by Pierre Villepreux of France and feature Michael Lynagh . 

  On the account of their relative performance against Rovigo , another leading Italian club , the Milanese must be the front runners . 

  They hammered hapless Rovigo by 40 points , while Treviso worked hard to prevail 36-24 over Naas Botha's Rovigo . 

  Ironically , all five Treviso tries ( Rovigo scored two ) were scored by forwards , an obvious hint that the master of backplay , Pierre Villepreux , has not yet made his mark on the team's playing pattern . 

  The All Greys 

  FOLLOWING the intervention of the IRB ( very keen not to jeopardise the talks between the SARB and the SARU ) the planned game between the All Blacks and a selection of South African players currently playing in Europe has been abandoned . 

  Both the SARB and the Italian Federation have vetoed the idea -- the game was scheduled to be played in Italy . 

  The New Zealanders instead played an Italian selection the week before the wedding of the All Black winger , John Kirwan , to a beauty from Treviso , Fiorela Tomasi . 

  The All " Grey " New Zealanders ( expressly forbidden from using the name and the All Black logo ) wore a classic grey outfit and called themselves " Lyons Tea XV " . 

  Before the Italian game the New Zealanders entertained the public in Vichy , France , when they appeared as the " Friends of Richard Loe XV " against the French Army . 

  Welcome to the club 

  THE IRB admitted five new members : Andorra ( a country playing in the FIRA second division ) , Chile ( arguably the second strongest nation in South America ) , Luxembourg , Hungary , and Latvia ( the first nation of the crumbling Soviet empire to join the Board ) . 

  " We are not very strong but are very willing to learn . 

  This is why we are here " , said Andris Ozois , the President of the Latvian Rugby Federation on the day of the World Cup Final . 

  In line to follow the Latvians are Georgia and the Ukraine -- two of the powers to be reckoned with from former Soviet rugby . 

  Moldavia , Khazakstan and Uzbekistan are expected to follow suit . 

  Canada , Italy , Japan and Argentina have joined the " Big Eight " of the Board as members of the Executive Council . 

  Welsh Catch 22 

  IN HIS unmistakable style , Micky Quinn describes his troubles affecting Welsh rugby : " In the Gulf War a Welsh Guardsman was lying wounded after a fierce attack in the desert . 

  One of his legs was shattered by shrapnel and lying there in the burning sun he prayed to God , " Please God , accept my three wishes -- Please send down St. David -- you know , we in Wales have tremendous faith in St. David " . " 

  " OK " said God , " granted " , and St. David suddenly materialised in front of our wounded warrior . 

  " Here I am , " he said " What are your two wishes ? " 

  " Oh , St. David , my leg hurts , I am losing a lot of blood . 

  Please do something " . 

  St. David took a close look at his leg " Sorry old son , nothing I can do . 

  It's too bad . 

  You may have to lose it altogether . 

  Now what's your third wish ? " 

  " Oh , St. David , you know that we in Wales are very proud of our rugby . 

  We love our rugby more than anything else " . 

  " Yes , I know " said St. David " I played outside-half myself in the Heavens team . " 

  " You know , St. David , that Welsh rugby has been having a terrible time lately . 

  The English beat us in Cardiff , the French destroyed us , it's really very bad . 

  Please can you do something to help Wales win the World Cup " ? 

  " Well , my son , that's a very hard one -- maybe -- let us have another look at your leg " ! " 

  WHISTLE STOP ! 

  THE CLIVE NORLING COLUMN 

  The referees for the 1991 World Cup were always going to be placed under close scrutiny by the media , as well as spectators both at the ground and watching on television , and so it turned out . 

  At the commencement of the tournament it was made clear that referees had been instructed to apply Laws 18 and 19 . 

  The tackled player carrying the ball must immediately play the ball and not hold onto it . 

  But , perhaps more importantly , no other player could ( Law 18. ( 2 ) ( d ) ) wilfully fall on or over a player lying on the ground with the ball in his possession . 

  In the early pool games , the referees proved to be very strict indeed in applying this particular law , even to the extent of penalising players who had been pushed on top of other players lying on the ground with the ball . 

  The penalty count in the early games went well over the 30 mark , particularly in the England v Italy game at Twickenham , where it appeared that the Italians wanted to kill the ball on the ground every time . 

  I have already had countless phone calls and letters from Rugby World &amp;amp; Post readers asking about the law of repeated infringement and if it could apply to a team as well as an individual player . 

  Repeated infringement comes under Law 26 Foul Play , ( 2 ) ( d ) . 

  " It is illegal for any player ... to infringe repeatedly any Law of the game " . 

  The notes to this Law make it clear the course of action to be taken : " It is a question for the referee whether or not a series of the same offences by different players of a team amounts to repeated infringement . 

  If he considers that it does , he should give a general warning to that team and , if the offence is repeated , he must order the offending player off the field . 

  In deciding the number of offences which should constitute " repeated infringement " the referee should always apply a strict standard in representative and senior matches . 

  On the third occasion a caution must be given " . 

  It is always difficult for a referee to apply this law . 

  Several refereeing colleagues , asked why the advantage law was not applied when Laws 18/ 19 on the ground had been infringed . 

  Most referees will tell you that when a new directive comes out on a particular law , referees tend to concentrate on that law , sometimes at the expense of refereeing other laws . 

  Law 8 , Advantage states " The referee shall not whistle for an infringement during play which is followed by an advantage gained by the offending team ... a mere opportunity to gain advantage is not sufficient " . 

  The World Cup referees must have felt that the ball had " been killed " on the ground and that it was therefore necessary to blow straight away for the penalty rather than wait for the advantage to occur . 

  Hopefully , all players at all levels will now realise that rugby is a game to be played by players standing on their feet and that those who wilfully fall on or over other players on the ground to prevent the ball being played will be penalised immediately . 

  In the closing stages of the tournament I felt that the message had got through to the players about staying on their feet , and there were less penalties given for this offence than in the pool games . 

  This allowed the senior referees to relax more with their refereeing and the games flowed accordingly . 

  I thought that my colleague Derek Bevan had an excellent final with the right approach of whistle and advantage . 

  The obvious talking point after the game was the deliberate knock-down by David Campese , which prevented the ball reaching Rory Underwood . 

  Derek decided that in the position that Rory was standing , plus the possible cover defence from the Australians , that a try for England would probably not have been scored , so he simply awarded a penalty kick . 

  Law 12 Try and Touch-Down states : " A penalty try shall be awarded between the posts if but for foul play by the defending team ... a try would have been scored " . 

  In this instance the foul play was the deliberate knock-down , and Derek had to be sure that Rory would have caught the ball and that no Australian would have legally prevented him scoring a try . 

  In ITV's studio at Twickenham the debate was intense about the incident , particularly the fact that play was still some 22 metres from the Australian goal-line ; however , distance does not affect the referee's decision to award a penalty try . 

  A similar incident occurred with me in 1983 between Australia and Argentina from even further out from the goal-line , and on that occasion I felt Australia would definitely have scored a try but for a deliberate knock-on by the defenders and awarded a penalty try . 

  If the referee has any doubt as to whether or not a try would have been scored he can only award a penalty , exactly the decision in the final . 

  I am sure our English readers will be disagreeing with me ! 

  S. A. -- DO WE HAVE LIFT OFF ? 

  ENGLAND v S. A. 80 TICKETS ON OFFER ENGLAND EXTRA inside 1992/ 93 FIXTURES PULL OUT 

  contents 

  Fixtures 1992-93 

  International and domestic events listed in detail 

  New Laws 

  Clive Norling wrestles with the need to absorb 19 changes 

  Your Country Needs You ! 

  Steve Bale urges precedence for country over club interests 

  Hastings -- The Heir Apparent 

  Bill McLaren talks to the skipper in waiting 

  Probyn -- holding back the years 

  Mick Cleary reveals the secrets of England's veteran prop 

  Dad's Army 

  Mick Cleary on which England veterans will reappear in 92-93 

  ... and Mickey Mouse as Official Mascot ! 

  John Robbie slams SA's management selection for Europe 

  NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA IN SOUTH AFRICA 

  - S. A. -- do we have lift off ? -- Nick Cain asks whether South Africa can cope with the World Cup 

  - Dwyer's Wallabies walk on water -- Steve Jones sees trouble coming from the new ruck/ maul law 

  - South Africa v New Zealand -- the one that almost got away 

  Buck's Broadside 

  Wayne Shelford says defeat was good for South Africa 

  Aussies Raise the Standard 

  Greg Campbell describes how ARFU president Joe French tackled a sticky situation on the tour to S. A. 

  Take it away , Champ ! 

  . 

  South Africa v Australia -- Wallabies on top of the world 

  Off the Beaten Track 

  When the tour ends , head for the Okavango 

  Whitbread Player of the Month 

  Leicester &amp;amp; England " B " flanker Neil Back spotlighted 

  England v South Africa Tickets Offer 

  Your big chance to see an historic encounter 

  Pick-me-up for the Men in Green 

  Heather Kidd reports on Ireland's rebuilding process 

  Chasing James Bridie's Dream 

  Bill McMurtrie on the rise of the Anglo Scots 

  OVERSEAS 

  - AUSTRALIA -- Wallaby skipper warns on SA's poor infrastructure 

  - NEW ZEALAND -- Don Cameron on a yen for the Rising Sun 

  - SOUTH AFRICA -- Bedford Blasts at the big city slickers 

  - FRANCE -- Penaud looks the Part , Pierre Berbizier tells Chris Thau 

  - ARGENTINA -- Pumas sent to slaughter , says Eric Weil 

  - CANADA -- Peter McMullan describes a brutal schedule 

  The World's Best 

  Peter Jackson reviews the top international marksmen 

  PLUS - ON THE AIR - POSTBAG - ROUNDABOUT - ENGLAND ROUND-UP - WINDOW ON WALES - IRISH REPORT - SCOTTISH NOTES - YOUTH - COTTON OXFORD AWARDS - CLASSIFIED 

  Will this shot of Springbok lock Adri Geldenhuys come to symbolise the big lift-off for South Africa -- or just a temporary reprieve from sporting isolation ? 

  Politics must play a major role in any decision -- but how long can the organisers afford to defer their verdict on whether the country is stable enough to stage World Cup 1995 ? 

  On The Air ... 

  WITH NIGEL STARMER-SMITH 

  Creeping unease 

  It's difficult not to get involved in , or at least take a view on , the current Great Educational Examination Debate that's sweeping the UK -- the standards being achieved , or not achieved , as the case may be ; the fairness of a system that employs different examining boards with different syllabuses and differing subject ingredients and , importantly , with varying amounts ( from zero per cent to 100 per cent ) of coursework that may benefit from parental/ teacher " assistance " in varying degrees . 

  Over the last few years I can admit to having heard enough of the individual experiences of examination candidates to make me totally cynical about a system which confers , supposedly , passes and grades of equal status on students in public examinations that cover so wide-ranging a diversity of structure and subject content . 

  But , thankfully , the public debate will have helped to ensure that no longer can the glaring inadequacies of the system and its inherent unfairness to participating individuals remain ignored . 

  Honesty and secrecy seldom go hand-in-hand , and it may be that the example of open discussion and fair play in education has some lessons for the world of sport . 

  Unfortunately , however , it is money and commercialisation , not standards of play , that are tarnishing the image of major sports . 

  What have we seen of late ? 

  A sordid battle for soccer's TV rights ; an English Open Golf Championship shorn of its leading contenders because of an appearance money rumpus ; a near walk-out by athletes on account of a purported $200,000 appearance fee for Carl Lewis . 

  As for rugby ... well , nothing quite so glaring , yet still enough to provoke a creeping unease about affairs at the highest international level , whether it concerns incomplete accounts for the 1987 World Cup ; unfulfilled profit projections , by a huge margin , with disturbing outline accounts emanating from the 1991 event ; and what seem to be , at the time of writing , so many unanswered questions about the 1995 World Cup . 

  It is not the entirely understandable worries about the choice of South Africa as the tournament venue when that country is in so delicate a political -- and hence economically sensitive -- state , but rather the veil of secrecy that seems to shroud all commercial aspects of the next World Cup event . 

  Even some way down the scale it would have been interesting to know what size bag of silver would accrue to the coffers of the RFU in return for abandoning the traditional white England jersey . 

  Does everything have to have a " For Sale " sign on it these days ? 

  Had we but known that money was so scarce , RW&amp;amp;P would willingly have sent round the collection box to gather money to compensate the RFU in return for keeping the England jersey white ( or , for that matter , the WRU for keeping the Welsh jersey red ) . 

  Now as England prepare to play Canada in the first ( non-World Cup ) international in the multi-coloured , all-singing and all-dancing strip ( with the natty little colour bit on the shorts ) -- the first change since March 27th 1871 -- let no-one say we did not mourn its passing . 

  Still , there's nothing secretive or lacking in discussion on the new laws in operation -- and how refreshing to mention something that does not invoke the subject of money . 

  You will have heard already a whole range of opinion on their validity and usefulness . 

  I side with Bob Templeton , the Australian coach , and his pragmatic approach . 

  " The new laws are there , there's a lot of work to be done in implementing them and coaching players to best effect . 

  There's no point discussing at this stage the pros and cons -- better to learn to stay on your feet and make sure you keep the ball available for use in ruck and maul " . 

  Plenty of food for thought ahead to go with your pint of Whitbread Best Bitter , Flowers Original , Heineken or Courage over the bar ! 

  Now about that little matter of club sponsorship . 

  Can we paint the grass with the company logo , paint the crossbar , the ball , the touch-judge , the hooker's face , shave our heads ? 

  Changing times , indeed ! 

  Rugby POSTBAG 

  SEND YOUR LETTERS TO : RUGBY WORLD &amp;amp; POST , 

  Jekyll and Hyde Scotland 

  THE HISTORY of the Scots in rugby is full of contradictions . 

  They have been either obstinately ultra-conservative and hide-bound by tradition or they amaze all and sundry by initiatives . 

  Examples of the latter include the installation of an electric blanket at Murrayfield , which has meant that they are the only home union not to have had a Five Nations match postponed within the last 30 years , whilst they always have a venue for important representative matches available there if the weather tries to sabotage the programme . 

  The Scots were also the first home union to introduce a fully competitive league programme , which they did in season 1973/ 74 . 

  In contrast they still do not have a national knock-out cup , although one is promised for 1993-94 . 

  They were also the last of the home unions to award caps for internationals against France and they steadfastly refused to pick any capped players for " B " internationals , which they have from this coming season stopped playing . 

  Instead , they now talk about " A " internationals , although Ireland are describing their match against Scotland " A " at Lansdowne Road on Monday , 28th December 1992 , as a " B " match ! 

  Scotland " A " are also supposed to be meeting Italy on Saturday , 19th December 1992 , in Aberdeen , but one wonders how the Italians will be expected to approach this fixture . 

  Do they send a " B " side , an " A " team mixture of full caps and " up-and-comings " or a fully representative national team ? 

  Would it not be nice for the SRU to encourage the latter course and pick a full Scotland team to meet them , treating the match as a full " capped " game ? 

  But will they ? 

  Ireland did it against Italy on New Year's Eve 1988 and Wales are scheduled to award caps for their game with the Italians in Cardiff on October 7th this year , so why not do the same , Scotland ? 

  The final " Jekyll and Hyde " example shows both characteristics in one fell swoop . 

  They were the first country to organise an international sevens tournament , which they did to celebrate their Centenary in 1973 . 

  An injury time try by Keith Fielding won it for England against the brave Irish . 

  However , as has been reported in International Crossroads , they have been awarded the 1993 World Cup Sevens , a decision which did not meet with general approval , and as there is a rebuilding programme at Murrayfield only 38,000 fans will be able to watch the tournament on each day . 

  Trim the leagues more 

  I AM writing in response to Mr. Gage's letter in September RW&amp;amp;P in which he says that there is not a proper step between the club rugby and international rugby in England and that there will be too many league matches for top players . 

  My suggestions would be to trim the top two divisions to eight teams each and then play the leagues on a home and away basis , thus having only 14 league matches . 

  As for the representative level I would restructure the county championship . 

  There are currently 27 county teams in England so the logical thing to do would be to divide the counties into three divisions of nine . 

  The counties would then play each team in their division once . 

  The matches would be spread out between September and December . 

  At the end of the season there would be a simple " two up , two down " basis . 

  In the first division the top two teams would play off at Twickenham for the county title . 

  The main advantage with this system would be that players from junior clubs could get noticed by selectors and make their way up the representative ladder without having to move clubs . 

  First five-pointer ? 

  ON the first day of the season ( September 1st ) Penzance-Newlyn played Penryn . 

  Within three minutes of the 6.30 ( approx ) kick-off Charles Nizzen , playing at no.7 , had scored a try . 

  Was this , perhaps the first 5-point try scored in this country ? 

  Delicious hors d'oeuvre 

  RUGBY is a minority sport in Holland but those who do play are mad keen . 

  The rugby-playing region is The Hague , Leiden , Amsterdam and Haarlem . 

  I recently attended the 5th Euro Rugby Trophy Tournament at Leiden who have as their club motto " Doorzetten Is Onze Kracht " ( Fortitude is our Strength ) , which the players have adapted to " Drinkken Is Onze Kracht " -- " Drinking Is " ... 

  Founded in 1971 DIOK have built themselves up as the strongest outfit in Holland and were Dutch champions in 1981 , 1989 , 1990 , 1991 and 1992 . 

  The Euro Rugby Tournament currently has four participating teams -- and over the years visiting teams from the UK have included Bath , Harlequins , Kelso and Cardiff . 

  This year's tournament took place between 14 and 16 August with Bridgend , Gloucester and G. S. D. de Cascais Portugal as the visiting teams . 

  In the final between Bridgend and Gloucester , after a flash of brilliance from Glen Webbe towards the end when he went over for a magnificent try and another brilliant individual effort by him when he sent over Mark Jones , Bridgend clinched a 22-12 victory . 

  This was a thoroughly enjoyable tournament for which Eric Jan Berendsen of DIOK must take a large slice of credit and it was also superb as an August pre-season appetizer . 

  The hospitality was excellent and I can recommend it to all fans who feel starved of their rugby in late summer . 

  The event is there to stay . 

  Ban this padding 

  SOUTH Africa's re-entry of the rugby scene promises much extra interest ( their general approach could make them the " French " of the Southern Hemisphere ) , but I was concerned to see that a few of them , Naas Botha in particular , were wearing shoulder pads . 

  Since no commentator or studio expert remarked on this as anything unusual , can we assume that by the next World Cup rugby players will resemble American Superbowl players ? 

  Some " protective " measures can encourage recklessness or excessive aggression . 

  Gum shields are one thing ( having rattled my teeth on many a South African hard field in bygone days , and having been bitten more than once in scrums , I wish they had appeared long ago ) , but shoulder pads are entirely different and their acceptance could change the game for the worse , in my opinion . 

  Why denigrate other code 

  MAY I take this opportunity to say how relieved I was to find that the August 1992 issue of your splendid magazine was largely free of the indefatigable hostility directed towards rugby league football by its immediate predecessor ? 

  I have loved rugby union all my life and will continue so to do ; the thrilling Australian rugby league tourists of 1982 and 1986 meant that I could no longer choose to ignore the other code of rugby football . 

  I simply do not see the need to exalt one code by denigrating the other . 

  Now for some uncomfortable questions : What legal or , dare one say it , moral basis enables the rugby union authorities to discriminate against individuals who once had the temerity to accept payment for playing rugby league but who so dearly want to resume playing rugby union ? 

  Is there not one prominent rugby union footballer or journalist who is compelled to criticize this scandalous and absurd state of affairs ? 

  When will you all stop regarding rugby league converts from union as persona non grata -- who will ever forget the WRU's public humiliations of Jonathan Davies ? 

  Rugby World &amp;amp; Post will be better off by ceasing to ululate on the supposed demise of John Gallagher at Leeds and simply grant him an interview instead -- I cannot be the only admirer of this great All Black fullback to want to find out what is really going on . 

  I do hope you will be courageous enough to publish this letter . 

  I am hopeful that it does not impinge upon the game's great amateur status -- I leave that sort of thing to the likes of Naas Botha and David Campese . 

  Changes essential 

  AS an avid fan of South African rugby , I was delighted to see the'Boks back playing officially in the international scene . 

  Some of the greatest ever test series have included the Springboks -- nobody loves a free-flowing , fast game more than the South Africans . 

  I watched with great interest the encounters in August with the All Blacks and the Wallabies . 

  Although the game against the All Blacks was entertaining , the flaws in the Boks line-up were evident to see and changes should have been made for the following encounter with the World Champions . 

  A brilliant set of backs , but a poor pack , with the exception of Uli Schmidt ( surely the greatest " forward " in the world ) ; the forwards' contribution was minimal in what had promised to be a great encounter up front . 

  A couple of back-row changes and a second-row change were badly needed and I are sure the humiliation against the Wallabies could have been avoided if the selectors had acted on the evidence . 

  I await for better selections and performance in the autumn from the so-called " heirs apparent " to the Webb Ellis Trophy . 

  Gim me that old style rugby 

  IN mid-July 1991 training began in St. Just for any child under 16 who wanted to play rugby union -- at that time I had no kit and no idea of how to run a junior/ mini rugby club . 

  Thanks to Graham Waters of St. Just and Frank Butler ( Cornwall YDO ) the " Mini All Blacks " took to the road on 1st December 1991 for their first game against Redruth . 

  Considering there were no pre-season fixtures they did quite well with an end of season total of 29 games played . 

  Seventy boys and girls from U6 to U14 played rugby -- most of them for the first time ever . 

  They lost more games than they won -- and some were drawn . 

  After each game you would be forgiven if you thought they had always won , because , win or lose , their only concern was " who are we playing next " ? 

  These young persons' attitude to the game reminds me of how the old game used to be -- when there were no leagues and no cup competitions . 

  In those days we had not a care in the world , the only thing that counted was the game in which we were playing . 

  In those days rugby was for rugby players , not spectators . 

  It is only the very young player who can now play in the spirit of the game and enjoy rugby for what it used to mean . 

  Right blend was sent 

  I FELT I had to comment on your England " B " article of June 1992 by Paul Stephens . 

  Firstly he criticises the standard of opposition , whereas Ireland's first team only played two so-called hard games -- Auckland and Canterbury . 

  Both times they were slaughtered , and they found their games against " lowly provincial opposition " quite ample including the defeat by Manawatu plus hard/ close games against Bay of Plenty and Poverty Bay . 

  Does it make more sense to be beaten 62-7 or play tight competitive fixtures like Southland and NZ Universities as England " B " did . 

  Paul Stephens says it was no more than New Zealand's third string side with the best 30 on tour ( though Turner and Cooper played against the World XV and Seymour and Rush were picked to tour South Africa ) . 

  The same could be said of England " B " because , apart from the regular England XV , many others -- e. g. Redman , Robinson , Rodber , Pears , Hill , Hall , Heslop and Oti -- were not considered or available . 

  He wonders why Thorneycroft was pulled out of the student squad and Pepper was not when it's obvious that openside flanker is a position where England have strength in depth whereas not on the wing . 

  He bemoans the fact that players such as Dawe and Barnes went on tour but after their failure of the Argentine'90 tour it is obvious that a balanced , experienced squad was necessary . 

  He says a case could be made for Manchester's fullback , but in no sport are players picked from outside the national leagues -- and anyway we can all spend hours picking players unlucky not to tour . 

  Finally he asks , have we forgotten how effective Little and Horan were while commenting on the age aspect , but it does not work like this . 

  Just because Australia has two great 21-year-old centres does not mean every rugby-playing country does . 

  So let us not feel too depressed that we did not send 20-year-olds , half from northern clubs , and half from southern ones . 

  Any more than that I wasted five minutes reading his articles ? 

  Nick Cain's ROUNDABOUT 

  Wallabies tap a rich seam 

  BEFORE the two-pronged Antipodean attack on the Springboks few South Africans were prepared to anticipate a plummeting fall from grace . 

  If he had known what fate lay in store for his beloved Boks perhaps State President F. W. de Klerk would have decided against holding a midweek reception for the three teams about to lock horns for the supremacy of the Southern Hemisphere some 200 metres down an old mine shaft on the Johannesburg Reef -- Shaft 14 , Gold Reed City , to be precise . 

  It was , of course , not the Springboks but Nick Farr-Jones's Wallabies who were to emerge from the restored gold mine shining as brightly as a 24-carat nugget to inflict on South Africa their worst-ever defeat in international rugby . 

  Thankfully the old saw that " you cannot call yourselves world champions until you've beaten the Boks " has been laid to rest and now , politics allowing , the South African game can get on with the long overdue task of putting its own house -- in particular its over-powerful domestic unions -- in order . 

  This applies not only to bringing the Springboks up to running speed on the international scene but also , and more crucially , to ensuring that the process of black and white integration stated by the formation of SARFU advances far beyond the fundamentally cosmetic union achieved to date . 

  Where playing standards are concerned the years of isolation definitely seems to have blunted South Africa's sense of " street wisdom " in terms of both tactics and selection -- and a dismal Currie Cup final in the wake of the tours , in which Natal beat Transvaal 14-13 , indicates that the learning curve may take time . 

  Certainly the Springbok squad for their tour of France and England has more than a touch of the curate's egg about it . 

  The Bok selectors do , however , seem to have made an effort to add some pace to the back row in the form of Pretorius and Richter , both of whom showed well when Northern Transvaal produced comfortably the best provincial performance of the Antipodean tours to take the Wallabies to the wire . 

  Captain's convention -- ( l-r ) Naas Botha , F. W. de Klerk , Nick Farr-Jones and Sean Fitzpatrick looking for nuggets at the bottom of Shaft 14 at a reception given by the State President in the week before the Ellis Park test . 

  Samoa needs your help ! 

  IT would be difficult to exaggerate the economic disaster that befell Western Samoa when the South Sea Islands were struck by Cyclone Val . 

  The small , thriving community has been devastated . 

  Help is desperately needed -- and rugby friends can do their bit . 

  Clubs are asked to support a special appeal , organised by the Commonwealth Trust , by sending 20 to the Disaster Appeal which will qualify them for entry into a draw with many prizes -- headed up by Cathay Pacific's donation of two First Class London/ Hong Kong round trips plus tickets for the 1993 Hong Kong Sevens -- as well as tickets for just about every top sporting event to be staged next year in the British Isles -- test cricket , rugby internationals , Open golf , Grand National , Formula One racing , and so on . 

  So please sent your club donation of 20 to the Disaster Appeal , . 

  Finding time to tie the knot ... 

  So busy are international players that they are lucky if they are able to find the time even in summer to tie the knot . 

  However , England's Simon Hodgkinson ( left ) did marry Fiona Radley with guests including Will Carling and Dewi Morris ( getting in some tackling practice ) , whilst Wales' Garin Jenkins ( right ) and his smiling bride clearly enjoyed their big day . 

  Right priorities ? 

  A COACH , who became so incensed with his opposite number at an U8 match in New Zealand , has been banned for three years for punching and knocking him unconscious with the result that specialist surgery might be required for a fractured cheek bone and other complications . 

  Quite an example to set before 7-year-olds . 

  The incident occurred in Whangarei and the alleged aggressor was John Rankin-Hurst of the Waipu club . 

  His victim was Hikurangi laboratory technician Bernie Hately . 

  The Waipu club , who are considering an appeal against the local union suspension , had better make sure of their ground unless they wish to become a laughing stock . 

  Laughing boys ... or getting shirty ? 

  AS A barometer of public opinion RW&amp;amp;P's Postbag seems to give a fairly good cross section . 

  All shades of opinion are generally represented -- some well beyond the pale , others so " colourful " that they are beyond inflicting on the magazine's readers . 

  There is almost always a pro and con view -- except when England decide to change their shirt design again . 

  It was unanimous last time and it looks like going the same way this time , especially after Joe Punter saw the new design in the press . 

  It appears that the RFU is as much the villain of the piece as Cotton Traders , the Fran Cotton and Steve Smith-owned kit company , whose World Cup shirt was dropped by the RFU before the Five Nations despite the fact that the company had a cast-iron contract that covered the tournament . 

  After much fretting and threats of legal action , the RFU had little choice but to back down -- and endorse a strip that is if anything , more garish than the last effort . 

  Now we have three shirts in existence at the same time : England wore the World Cup strip at the Lord's Taverners sevens , the traditional strip at the Selkirk sevens and will don the new kit against Canada . 

  So which kit does Dad buy his boy for Christmas . 

  I would have tried to ask Dudley Wood , secretary to the RFU , but he did not show up at the new kit's launch ... 

  Having fun during their modelling assignment at Twickenham as the new strip is unveiled are ( l-r ) Dewi Morris , David Pears ( in the alternative strip ) , and Jason Leonard . 

  Bishop -- take a bow ! 

  KIWI referee David Bishop has had an exciting year , what with being " congratulated " in the Parc des Princes tunnel by Daniel Dubroca and then being asked whether he minded being wired for sound to the whole stadium for the Springbok-Wallaby clash at Newlands . 

  Bishop , never one to duck a challenge , agreed to cooperate in a South African-led venture which enables anybody with the cash to buy or hire a small walkman-like receiver to tune into the ref during the match . 

  The upshot was that Bishop had a superb match as he sought to keep the game alive by constructively cautioning and chivvying the players to stay within the bounds of the permissible . 

  He's also something of a clairvoyant . 

  Turning to Naas Botha just as he was preparing to kick off the second half , Bishop remarked , " We're in for a hell of a 40 minutes , Naas " -- just what sort of hell Botha would rather not have found out ... 

  David Botha -- definitely promising ! 

  17,500 worth of thanks ! 

  THE RAFFLE for the Charlotte Starmer-Smith Medical Fun at the Royal Berkshire Hospital , Reading , raised 17,500 ( Fund total now 97,000 ) -- much of it from the rugby community . 

  Thanks to so many who provided 90 great prizes -- especially Air New Zealand , Rhino Rugby Products , Nike , Programme Publications , Rugbyclass Coaching Holidays , England tea members and many more . 

  And well done the major prize-winner , Mr. S. Davies of John Broom &amp;amp; Co. , a keen rugby supporter who is now set to have a rather special honeymoon following his wedding next month -- off with his bride to New Zealand ! 

  Good timing ! 

  Thank you all . 

  Ed . 

  " SEEN &amp;amp; HEARD ... 

  " Lighten up and think positive . 

  There's no reason to feel dejected about the future . 

  The Springboks will rise again " -- BOB DWYER ( Australia coach ) after his team's overwhelming victory at Cape Town ( 26-3 ) . 

  " The answer to them then , as now , is a categorical " no " . 

  I shall play the odd game for the Harlequins Gentlemen for some exercise and also in charity events , but that is all " -- PAUL ACKFORD ( former England lock ) on rumours that he might be persuaded to return to the international scene . 

  " We want to win for as long as we can because it would be a long way to go for just one game . 

  We do not want to end up in the beer tent at three o'clock " -- DICK BEST ( England coach ) about the Selkirk Sevens , where his seven lost in the quarter-finals to Gala . 

  " If the top players are interested in unification they will offer to help in clinics and such , because these children should have the chance to play for South Africa " -- NGONDE BALFOUR ( SARFU development officer with responsibility for underprivileged areas ) . 

  " They should drop the entire pack " -- IVAN VODANOVICH ( former New Zealand coach ) after seeing Australia destroy South Africa in Cape Town ( 26-3 ) . 

  " What happened at Ellis Park is a set-back . 

  We want all sports bodies to discuss the situation , but Verwoerd will not be allowed to rule this nation from the grave " -- NELSON MANDELA on the singing of Boer national anthem Die Stem at Ellis Park before the Test against New Zealand . 

  " Australians are the world champions . 

  They have proved it . 

  It is tough to come here and win . 

  It has been a wonderful experience to play against them " -- NAAS BOTHA ( South Africa fly-half and captain ) after the rout suffered against Australia . 

  " We always knew they were rugby crazy , but so are the New Zealanders and the Welsh . 

  At least they sometimes respect your privacy and are not so rude and arrogant about it " -- MICHAEL LYNAGH ( Australia fly-half ) complaining that South African supporters lack manners . 

  " We have already received a letter from Littlehey Prison asking for more away ( Courage League ) fixtures " -- DUDLEY WOOD ( RFU Secretary ) whilst answering queries about the fixtures schedule for 1992-93 . 

  CLIVE NORLING on the NEW LAWS 

  To say that my first game of the new season was out of the ordinary would be a massive understatement -- never in 25 seasons of refereeing have I had to learn and interpret 19 law changes and then get to apply them first time up in a game in France between two clubs from England and Scotland ! 

  The game between Wasps and Stirling County was part of a tournament in St Jean de Luz , just outside Biarritz , and was played under the new laws . 

  As both sides were positive in their approach to the new laws , the game was fast and flowing , with Wasps pulling away in the final quarter to win 35-10 . 

  It was noticeable that infringements occurred in the last quarter more than in the rest of the game and I put this down to tiredness and a resulting lack of concentration . 

  The main points that I picked out from the game affecting the law changes are : 

  1 ) Players in front of the kicker who still advance forwards towards the opposition . 

  2 ) Players still falling on the ball after a tackle . 

  3 ) Players using their outside arm in the lineout to win the ball . 

  4 ) Tackled player and tackler not moving away from the ball on the ground immediately . 

  It was good to see South Africa back in the international fold after so long . 

  The games against New Zealand and Australia were interesting to watch , if only to see where South Africa really stands in world rugby . 

  Both games showed the tremendous amount of work needed in the Republic to restore the team to the top in international terms . 

  An interesting point of law occurred during the test when New Zealand scored their first try through no.8 Zinzan Brooke following the award of a penalty five metres from the home goalline . 

  Several readers have asked if the kick was correctly taken , and what would have been the decision if defending players not on the goal-line had prevented Brooke from scoring a try . 

  Firstly , the taking of the kick . 

  Law 27 , Penalty Kick states that : " It may be taken by any player of the non-offending team and by any form of kick provided that the kicker , if holding the ball , must propel it out of his hands or , if the ball is on the ground , he must propel it a visible distance from the mark . 

  He may keep his hand on the ball while kicking it " . 

  Obviously this requirement was complied with by Brooke . 

  So , moving on to another requirement of this law , which states that " When a penalty kick is taken the following shall apply : ( a ) The kick must be taken without undue delay ; ( b ) the kick must be taken at or behind the mark on a line through the mark ; ( c ) The kicker may kick the ball in any direction and he may play the ball again , without any restriction except if he has indicated to the referee that he intends to attempt a kick for goal " . 

  Readers who saw the game on television will recall that Brooke did exactly as the law required and so the try was legal . 

  Moving on to the question of defenders stopping the try by not standing on the goal-line , Law 27(e ) is clear about what the offending team must do : " The opposing team must run without delay ( and continue to do so while the kick is being taken and while the ball is being played by the kicker's team ) to or behind the line parallel to the goal-lines and 10 metres from the mark , or to their own goal-line if nearer to the mark . 

  Retiring players will not be penalised if their failure to retire 10 metres is due to the rapidity with which the kick has been taken , but they may not stop retiring and enter the game until an opponent carrying the ball has run five metres " . 

  The last part of that law is crucial , in that the ball carrier can run five metres without a defender touching him . 

  If the penalty award is five metres from the goal-line , as in this case , then defending players must be standing on the goal-line when the kick is taken if they wish legally to prevent a try being scored . 

  If they are not on the goal-line five metres from the mark when the kick is taken and they then illegally prevent a try being scored the referee's decision would be the award of a penalty try . 

  The talking point from the test against Australia was not so much David Campese's 50th try in internationals , but the lead-up to the score itself . 

  Tim Horan had kicked the ball well into the home 22 metres area when Danie Gerber collected the ball and was immediately tackled by Horan . 

  The ball was released as per Law 18 , Horan collected and fed Campo for the try . 

  The question was : Did Tim Horan play the ball after the tackle legally ? 

  The new law change for this situation , Law 18 Tackle ( 1 ) ( b ) states : " After a tackle any other player must be on his feet when he plays the ball " . 

  So , what constitutes being on the ground ? 

  WE can see from the definition of a tackle that : " If the ball carrier is on one knee , or both knees , or is sitting on the ground or is on top of another player who is on the ground , the ball carrier is deemed to have been brought to ground " . 

  So being " on his feet " means that no other part of his body is in contact with the ground . 

  Horan was on his feet , just , when he played the ball and so the try was legal . 

  Congratulations Campo on number 50 . 

  We also saw in both tests the law change allowing a quick throw-in from touch . 

  But when should a quick throw-in from touch . 

  But when should a quick throw-in be allowed and when may it be stopped ? 

  Here we need to look at three areas of Law 23 Touch and Line-Out , which states B ) ( 1 ) : " A lineout is formed by at least two players from each team lining up in single lines parallel to the line of touch in readiness for the ball to be thrown in between them . 

  ( B ) ( 7 ) : The ball may be brought into play at a formed lineout or by a quick throw-in without waiting for players to form a lineout . 

  ( B ) ( 5 ) ( c ) : ... a quick throw-in is taken , from any point along the touch-line between where the ball went into touch and the goalline of the team throwing in the ball " . 

  It would therefore appear that a quick throw-in is only allowed when a lineout has not been formed in law . 

  Referees should use common sense on this approach , perhaps shouting " lineout formed " if they see a player planning to take a quick throw-in when the forwards have lined up ready for the original lineout . 

  I look forward to hearing your views on this subject . 

  With the new season now on top of us , it might be appropriate to expand on the new laws and to try to give the intentions behind the changes in certain areas . 

  Law 6 Referee and Touch Judges 

  A player who had an open or bleeding wound must leave the playing enclosure until such time as the bleeding is controlled and the wound covered or dressed . 

  Law 10 Kick-Off 

  A place-kick is now only taken to start the game , or to start the game after half-time . 

  After a score the game will be restarted by a drop kick from the centre of the half way line . 

  If from a kick-off the ball crosses the opposing team's goalline , a scrummage will be formed at the centre of the half-way line . 

  The intention is to speed up the taking of kick-offs and to stop the time wasting practice of kicking the ball dead instead of keeping it in play from the kick-off . 

  Law 16 Fair Catch ( Mark ) 

  A fair catch can be made by a player who is running when making the catch inside his 22 metre area . 

  Law 18 Tackle , Lying with , on or near the ball 

  Perhaps the most important law change to emphasise that rugby is played by players standing on their feet ; this season after a tackle any other player must be on his feet when he plays the ball immaterial of what distance he is away from the tackle . 

  The message is simple ; if you are on the ground after a tackle you are out of the game ! ! 

  Law 20 Scrummage 

  Safety is the main concern here . 

  Front-row players should follow the sequence of crouch , pause and engage only when the ball is available to be put in immediately . 

  The referee will indicate the readiness to form the scrummage by using the word " engage " . 

  Also to get the ball away quickly from the scrummage , the scrum-half can not convey to his opponents that the ball is out of the scrummage i. e. he can not dummy the ball . 

  Law 21 &amp;amp; 22 Ruck &amp;amp; Maul 

  This experimental law has caused the biggest outcry even before it has been played . 

  It all revolves around who get the put-in to the scrummage following a stoppage at ruck or maul . 

  The law now gives the scrummage to the team that was not in possession of the ball at the start of the ruck or maul . 

  This should encourage a more fluid game with better techniques in rucking and mauling . 

  From a refereeing point of view , when the maul becomes stationary the time allowed for the ball to emerge is the equivalent of the time currently allowed for the emergence of the ball from a collapsed maul . 

  If the maul is stationary but the ball is being moved back and out in the maul then the referee will allow time for the ball to emerge . 

  However , a second drive forward is not permissible once a rolling maul becomes stationary . 

  Law 23 Lineout 

  Here the changes are an attempt to get clean possession . 

  There must be a metre gap between players of opposing teams in the lineout . 

  Only the jumper is allowed to move for the ball with either his inside arm or with two arms . 

  Supporting players in the lineout can only move when the jumper has touched or caught the ball . 

  The emphasis should be on supporting and protecting your own jumper and not illegally interfering with the opposing jumper . 

  If referees are strict on the metre gap then we should start to see cleaner and better quality lineout ball . 

  A quick throw-in may be taken from any point along the touchline between where the ball entered touch and the goal-line of the team throwing in the ball . 

  Only the original ball can be used , and must have only been touched or handled by the player throwing in . 

  When kicked directly into touch from a penalty kick , the ball will be thrown in at the lineout by the team which kicked the ball into touch . 

  So not only will illegal play be penalised by surrendering possession of the ball , but now ground will also be surrendered ( and possession ) when the ball is kicked to touch . 

  So the penalty for illegal play is increased . 

  Players take note . 

  If a free kick is kicked on the full into touch then the lineout is back opposite the original mark for the free kick . 

  This includes a free kick taken from inside your own 22 metre area . 

  Law 24a Offside in General Play 

  In my opinion the best law change alongside the tackle law . 

  This now prevents players who are in front of the ball from advancing forward towards an opponent waiting to play the ball . 

  This change should stop the aimless kicking downfield . 

  Players now need to know clearly when they are onside or offside in order to follow the ball . 

  Law 26 Foul Play 

  It is unfortunate that we have in the Australia v New Zealand Second Test seen a player have his nose broken through illegal play , and the player's union concerned choosing not to use this new law change . 

  This states that , where a player commits an act of foul play which has not been detected by the match officials , that player's union has the discretion to cite that player to show cause why he should not be held accountable in the same way as a player who has been ordered off the field of play . 

  The intention of the IB is clear ; it is to clean up the game at all levels particularly the shop window of the internationals . 

  Perhaps it is time for the IB to appoint its own disciplinary committee to act where individual unions refuse to do so . 

  Otherwise this law change is meaningless . 

  I am sure that within the first month of the season , pens will be put to paper concerning the new law changes . 

  I would ask everyone involved in the game to allow a little time for these changes to settle in both with players and referees . 

  If we all look positively at these changes then I think the game will go forward ; however , a negative approach or " how can we get around these changes " approach by players and coaches will only cause problems for all concerned . 

  Let us give the game a chance . 

  Use it or lose it . 

  Springboks Adolf Malan and Johan Styger try to keep the ball from Wallaby hands at Newlands . 

  WALES 

  YOUR COUNTRY NEEDS YOU ! 

  Club loyalties had a ruinous on the Welsh game over the past decade , says STEVE BALE . 

  Now it's time for the national side to take precedence . 

  In Wales the club-v-country argument has gone on for longer even than the locust years -- a constant , nagging reminder of the manifold and manifest divisions that have wrought such damage on Welsh rugby . 

  Robert Norster , national team manager and most definitely a product of the new enlightenment , ventures to hope that at last it is changing . 

  Others have still to be convinced but , from Norster's standpoint , it is simple -- and anyone with any sense would have to agree that his logic is unimpeachable . 

  " The success of the national team is a prerequisite for success at every level " , he said . 

  Anathema as it may be to Welsh Rugby Union ears , this was something they realised at Twickenham at least five years ago and we have all seen the felicitous results . 

  So Heineken's recent big-money renewal of their sponsorship of the Heineken National League has to be seen in a wider context than the clubs who belong to the league . 

  More than 2 million , serviced by 1 million in marketing support , is striking recognition of the value of the league but , frankly , without a successful shop window it would be meaningless . 

  " People are growing more realistic than they used to be " , Norster added , judging that the divisive ways of the recent past are being addressed . 

  To which the answer is " Not before time " , but that presupposes that it is true . 

  How many Welsh coaches , for example , see their role as not only achieving success for their clubs but also furnishing players of quality for the new multiplicity of Welsh squads ? 

  When Alex Evans , the Australian now in charge at Cardiff , said as much , it was like a shaft of inspiration . 

  Still , things are not what they used to be . 

  When Wales won the Triple Crown in 1988 with a team who had amble development left in them , the future looked bright ; then came a calamitous tour of New Zealand followed by sundry other mishaps and the outlook became as dark as an All Black jersey . 

  That is an appropriate metaphor for the club v country division that came next . 

  First there was the John Ryan era when the then coach declined to choose players from the leading club , Neath . 

  Result : defeat which left Neath effectively and more or less openly pulling against what Ryan perceived to be the national interest . 

  On a Saturday in December 1988 Wales , without a single Neath players in the starting line-up , were humbled at Cardiff Arms Park by Romania ; on the Monday afterwards , as Neath were about to take out their frustration on Bridgend , a gateman at The Gnoll whispered in my ear : " Great result Saturday , was not it ? " 

  I have told this story umpteen times before , but in this context it bears repeating . 

  Pointing the way forward . 

  Wales assistant coach Gareth Jenkins ( right ) and coach Alan Davies ( left ) have argued that the only way to revitalise the Welsh scene is to place national interests above those of clubs . 

  Then Ron Waldron became coach and his own Neath players suddenly filled the Wales bill . 

  Result : even worse defeat , culminating in the degradation of last year's 60-pointer by Australia and the shenanigans that followed at the post-match dinner . 

  At Ballymore Welsh rugby bared its soul and it was screaming . 

  It had never been so low , and by then virtually the whole of the ( non-Neath ) rest of Welsh rugby was pulling against the national team . 

  Again , I well recall the secretary of a leading club saying just before one international : " I hope they get stuffed " And they did . 

  Overcoming these rivalries , which would be pretty were they not so debilitating , has proved harder than talking about them . 

  We have had big clubs v small clubs , east Wales v west Wales , above all at the moment the big clubs against the union , all of them undermining the fabric of the national game , everyone seeming to be suspicious of everyone else . 

  But do not take my word for it ; this is not a figment of the journalistic imagination . 

  Graham Tregidon became WRU president at the annual general meeting in June and one of the first things he did was go into print in the next issue of the union's newsletter to plead unity . 

  " We Must Stand United ! " blared the headline . 

  The very fact that he felt impelled to do so told its own story . 

  " There is one key area in which I hope to have some success over the next year and that is in bringing the clubs and the union closer together " . 

  Tregidon said : " It was obvious at the AGM that there is an us-and-them syndrome still lurking among the membership . 

  The union , and that means the general committee elected by the club as well as the professional staff appointed by the committee , are working for the benefit of everyone involved in the game in Wales . 

  We are all on the same side and are accountable to each other . 

  If we all pull together , then we can be a successful force in world rugby again . 

  If we bicker and backbite , then we will divide even further , fall and fall , it's a very simple equation " . 

  The good thing about the president's intervention is that it publicly recognised a problem that needed solution the very antithesis of WRU custom and practice for most of the past dozen or more ostrich era . 

  But will the clubs , more especially the big clubs for whom the internationals play , ever agree to dance the union's tune when every issue that comes up between them ends up simply coming between them ? 

  Last season ended with a ferocious row over the Bank Holiday scheduling of the Schweppes Cup semi-finals , though as usual the clubs backed off , their threats as empty as ever . 

  In fact they deserved every sympathy but they succeeded only in making themselves look obstructive and unreconstructed , relics of the pre-meritocratic days before the Heineken League , which of course they fought until the last ditch was so full of water they had to jump out . 

  But worse is that it comes at the very moment Davies and Jeff Young , the WRU technical director , and forward-looking others have put into place a representative structure designed to facilitate the flow of full international candidates . 

  Four or five " B " and U21 matches a season plus training weekends at full , " B " , development and U21 levels mean a bigger commitment to Wales than ever -- by baleful coincidence , at the very moment the commitment to clubs has never been bigger . 

  Clearly this can not go on ; hence the reason the union , almost as soon as the 12-club leagues are in place , is wondering whether and how to reduce them again . 

  Is could be seen as a classic example of the muddle that has been prevalent at the top of Welsh rugby except that the pressures here -- unrecognisable from those in other home unions -- are so many and varied that it is impossible to respond to them all , let alone resist them . 

  " We cannot tell clubs and players what to do ; that would be unrealistic in any international sport " , said Davies , who was present at the Bledisloe Cup series in Australia . 

  " But there is a strong feeling in Wales that we need to come back , and to do that we need to compete at world level . 

  " In countries like Australia and New Zealand the leading players play in the region of 25 rep games a season , perhaps a dozen or so of which will be full internationals . 

  WE have to match that level of performance and we will not do so if a player is playing 40 games a season of which half a dozen are representative . 

  We have to increase the representative nature of our rugby " . 

  We live in hope . 

  Perhaps one day it will be realised by all that when Wales struggle every component of Welsh rugby is liable to struggle too . 

  As the opposite is also so , the priority is evident but does the vision exist among men who sometimes fail to see beyond the end of their noses ? 

  We all fall down . 

  Club rivalries and Ron Waldron's Neath-based selection policy made Wales's tour to Australia last year an unmitigated disaster both on and off the pitch . 

  HASTINGS 

  the Heir Apparent ? 

  With Scotland's 1990 Grand Slam side gradually disbanding , BILL McLAREN talked to one of the ever-presents , laid-back fullback and captain-in-waiting GAVIN HASTINGS 

  With David Sole and Sean Lineen joining that renowned loose forward trio , John Jeffrey , Derek White and Finlay Calder , in retirement , Scotland will lean heavily this season on the experienced players who remain and , perhaps most of all , upon Gavin Hastings , still only 30 , who has played in 41 cap internationals as well as in three tests for the British Lions . 

  He also has to be a front runner for the captaincy of Scotland and indeed , if so chosen , would become only the eighth to do so from the fullback position , following W. D . 

  Brown ( Glasgow Academicals ) , Dan Drysdale ( Heriot's FP ) , Keith Geddes ( RAF , Wasps and London Scottish ) , Angus Cameron ( Glasgow HS FP ) , Ken Scotland ( Heriot's FP ) , Stewart Wilson ( London Scottish ) and Andy Irvine ( Heriot's FP ) . 

  Nor is the powerful Watsonian short of leadership experience , having skippered Watson's College , Scottish Schools ( notably to a shock win over the England Schools in 1980 ) , Watsonians , Cambridge University , London Scottish , the Anglo Scots , the Barbarians at the Hong Kong Sevens and , also last season , the senior aide in the official Scottish trial when his gifts of inspiration by personal example almost turned the tide . 

  Gavin Hastings ( left ) celebrates his part in the World XV's First Centenary Test victory over hosts New Zealand with David Sole , who he is tipped to succeed as captain of Scotland . 

  His well-being is of even higher importance to Scotland now that Peter Dods , such an admirable understudy with 23 caps , had decided to call it a day . 

  The Scots are grooming a dashing 20-year-old wing-cum-fullback , Ken Logan of Stirling County , as a future last line . 

  He became the first from his club to be capped , in the Second Test of the recent tour of Australia in Hastings' injury absence , and he played for Scotland " A " against Spain in Madrid on September 12 . 

  But the vast experience , stability and guidance to young colleagues that Hastings can impart has to be of particular import to Scotland's 1993 efforts . 

  Likeably laid-back and a philosophic kind of personality , Hastings currently has a crucial priority -- recovery from back damage that kept him out of that Second Australian Test . 

  Not only has that disc problem proved frustrating , but so has the inactivity temporarily imposed by a series of exploratory tests to assess the damage : " Having been injured in the second tour match against Queensland I got back to full fitness , played in the First Test and was looking forward to the second . 

  Two days before it , however , when we were running through some back moves , my back seemed to lock out and I could not move freely at all . 

  " It has been my decision not to do any training so far this season . 

  I really needed a rest and my hope was to be fit for the start of the National League programme at the end of September , but I doubt if that will be the case . 

  I am doing some special strengthening work that has been recommended and that hopefully will bring about recovery and will make surgery unnecessary . 

  " I certainly felt badly in need of a rest , having trained and played for the last two to three years virtually without a break . 

  In the cold light of day you come to realise that you just can not do it all the time , that the body comes to a point where , for the moment , it has had enough . 

  The World squad matches in New Zealand were great and I felt in fine fettle there but after injury in Australia it has been quite a struggle . 

  I have been lucky to have been on plenty of tours and hardly missed a training session or match so , by the law of averages , I cannot complain about that disappointing end to what had been a very enjoyable season . 

  " But you just have to put it all behind you and I just hope that my back trouble will clear up and I shall be able to start playing again soon " . 

  As golf is another favourite Hastings sport and an ideal means of relaxation it probably does not help his back problem that he gives the ball such a lick as to threaten to land it in the next kingdom ! 

  Although Scotland's record in Australia was nothing to write home about , Hastings pointed to lengthy travel and a demanding itinerary as factors whilst also seeing several pluses from the tour : " I do not think folk realise the scale of the country , the amount of travelling involved and the totally contrasting conditions you can encounter . 

  Our first midweek fixture was on a Thursday , the second on a Wednesday and the third on a Tuesday . 

  So we were playing three games every six days and that just does not allow enough recovery time from injuries . 

  I am sure that the lessons from that tour will be kept in mind when the next tour itinerary is arranged . 

  Giving it some . 

  The sheer distance of Hastings " place-kicks is one of Scotland's strongest attacking weapons , as his successful kick from his own half against Ireland last season showed . 

  " Having said that , there is no doubt that Australian rugby is on a high . 

  They have something like 40 players and they are very competitive and very strong and they caused us a lot of problems . 

  It was very encouraging , however , that several of the younger players did very well and challenged for test places . 

  You need that , to have fellows pushing like that . 

  It makes the more experienced guys look to their laurels . 

  " Another thing I admired about young lads like Ken Logan , Gregor Townsend and Peter Wright is that they have the right attitude , a little bit of cockiness . 

  You need to have that and it is no bad thing provided , of course , that at the same time you are prepared to listen and benefit from good advice . 

  " I do not believe that Scotland has fallen far down the pecking order of top rugby nations . 

  There is nothing wrong with being realistic and I suppose Scotland has about 20 or so players who could fit into the national side without weakening it , especially as we have recently lost a third of that national side . 

  It is true also that we do tend to play above ourselves . 

  Scotland has had a fairly successful period over the past two or three years and some think that we might not now be so successful -- but there is a lot of talent up here . 

  We now have Scotland " A " fixtures and the U21s are having more games . 

  In that way more of our players are being exposed to a more demanding grade of rugby . 

  The more of our young lads who to on tour and experience the higher standards of rugby in other countries the quicker they will develop and come through as cap challengers . 

  It is also important that we should get on well as a squad and , in this regard , we are very fortunate in the quality of our coaches who very quickly make every newcomer feel very much part of the team " . 

  Whether Hastings is invited to take on the role of Scottish captain is for the future , but he acknowledges the good fortune he has enjoyed in playing under such inspiring leadership : " You only need to look at the names of players who have captained Scotland to be aware of the tremendous honour it represents . 

  I've been lucky enough to play with several international captains -- Colin Deans , Gary Callander , Finlay Calder and David Sole -- and they have all been splendid leaders , different in their own ways but earning the respect of their colleagues . 

  I think that is the most important quality -- gaining the respect of your fellow players and setting alongside that your performance on the field . 

  Clearly each player so honoured brings his own style and personality to the job and we could not have had a better example than from David Sole . 

  No one could every doubt his qualities as a leader and his tremendous commitment to the task both on and off the field " . 

  Nor would the captain's off-field obligations cause Hastings concern , for his work with the Carnegie Partnership carries a PR type of role , part of which involves meeting people and dealing with clients and the media as well as assisting his old school , Watson's College , and his club , Watsonians , in a business capacity . 

  They are clients of the Carnegie Partnership which involves Scotland's fullback in coaching the Watson's College schoolboys three times a week and being responsible for developing the commercial side of his club . 

  Notwithstanding the merit and extent of his achievements , Gavin Hastings still retains the desire to reach out for the best of which he is capable with as yet undiminished zest : " Unless you set yourself tasks and ambitions , unless you have new targets , there is not much point in playing . 

  Whether it is an ambition to help Watsonians to win the Division One title or Scotland to win another Grand Slam or the next World Cup , you have to have in mind just what you seek to achieve . 

  " I am very competitive , having been brought up as one of four brothers and with parents who are competitive too . 

  Anyone seeing me train knows that I revel in preparation and competition . 

  I still enjoy beating some of the young guys at our various fitness tests ! 

  I am in my thirteenth season of senior rugby , I thoroughly enjoy every moment and I would not with to play for any other club than Watsonians . 

  " As for the law changes , I have watched games on television and have been impressed with the way in which the Southern Hemisphere countries have adapted to the new requirements . 

  There are more opportunities for quick thinking and it should make things very interesting with the need for players to be constantly on the alert . 

  The game could be a bit quicker with more chances for catching opponents by surprise and I have no doubt that David Johnson ( Watsonians , Glasgow and Scotland " A " coach ) will be studying the possibilities so that hopefully Watsonians will be at the fore in adapting their style . 

  Scotland too " . 

  PROBYN 

  holding back the years 

  If England prop JEFF PROBYN , now 36 , had a motto it would be : if you're good enough , you're young enough . 

  But retirement is not the only dirty word in his lexicon as MICK CLEARY discovered . 

  The hit man has been called in a few times to finish off Jeffrey Probyn yet never once has he managed to carry out his murderous brief . 

  The first Saturday of the 1992-93 season and there , as big a pain in the neck for the opposition as ever , is Probyn in his England colours . 

  On several occasions the obituarists have been poised , ready to send the man to his grave with a few solemn words of recognition . 

  First the lawmakers tried to do it . 

  In the mid-Eighties they ruled that the scrummage must be above shoulder height . 

  The end was nigh for the old tradesman prop : bring in the bulky back-row forward . 

  One game later , Probyn and his mates were back in their rightful position and flankers , nursing and cursing their unfamiliar bruises , were back in theirs . 

  A few years down the road and along come the fitness men with their clipboards and stop-watches . 

  These guys will soon weed out these old , wheezing " flabbies " in the front row . 

  Get rid of the pensioners : bring in the fit young props reared on body-fat callipers , VO2 max and three Weetabix for breakfast . 

  Probyn , 37 next March , has seen them all off and fully intends to continue doing so for the foreseeable future . 

  " Age is all in the mind " , says Probyn . 

  " Just look at Linford Christie or even Lester Piggott . 

  If you're good enough , then you're young enough " . 

  He's a singular man is Jeffrey . 

  He's one of the strongest scrummagers in the game yet has rarely been inside a gym in his life , although a few of his international colleagues swear that he must be a closet trainer . 

  " He just never lets on that he's done any fitness work " , says one . 

  " But I bet he does it in secret " . 

  Jeffrey rarely lets on about anything . 

  One of his great hallmarks is the stare : not a demented warrior eyeball-to-eyeball look , but that rather silent , unassuming , dismissive look which can wind opponents up to breaking point . 

  " I am happiest when the opposition are hitting me " , says Probyn . 

  " Then I know that I've got the better of them . 

  They only do it when they're struggling . 

  It's a great feeling " . 

  A couple of Frenchmen last season were the latest to try and rearrange the Probyn features but to no avail . 

  " That was all a bit of a shame " , recalls Probyn , " because the French are without doubt the best set of forwards you play against . 

  Unfortunately they're also the worst set as well . 

  They lose their composure so easily . 

  As their mental control goes so too does their technique . 

  I love playing against them because you never know quite what you're going to come up against " . 

  Quite how much longer opponents have to come up against Probyn's unrelenting shoulders is unclear . 

  Probyn himself fears that the decision may be taken out of his hands . 

  " Selectors can get a bit confused sometimes " , he says . 

  " They can get stuck by this fear that they ought to be planning for the future . 

  And so out go the old troupers and in come the fresh-faced kids . 

  Now it's rarely the case that the replacement is actually a better player than the so-called old fellow . 

  He might , in a few years time , become one but who knows . 

  Your national side may not have a future themselves by that time if they've lost every game in between . 

  " I would say that England's recent success has been due , in no small way , to having experience on the side . 

  Why tamper with a successful formula ? 

  The stopwatch may suggest otherwise but so what . 

  To my mind we've gone overboard on fitness . 

  Not that is is not important . 

  Of course it is . 

  But of at least equal importance are skills . 

  You may be fit and fast but if you cannot scrummage or drive a lineout , they you're no good to anyone . 

  " I also think that the older player has a much greater mental edge . 

  Last year's Championship for example was a rather low-key affair . 

  Now that may sound arrogant and patronising on my part to say so . 

  But there was a certain inevitability about our second Grand Slam . 

  Perhaps the World Cup had taken too much out of the younger sides . 

  I do not know . 

  But I do know that England drew on an enormous well of self-belief . 

  We knew how to pace ourselves and how to prepare ourselves mentally " . 

  Probyn is one of the few players on the international scene to have played the game at every level : from Old Albanians , Streatham and Croydon through Richmond and Wasps to the first of his 33 caps in 1988 . 

  As a result he's probably better placed than most to reflect on the advance of professionalism . 

  " My line on the matter has always been fairly clear " , says Probyn . 

  " If no-one gets any money , then I am quite happy . 

  I play the game for fun and that will always be the prime motivation . 

  It's a hobby : my job is elsewhere . 

  However , if some people in the game are getting money then it ought to be shared out . 

  It's as simple as that " . 

  As things stand the division of money within the game is fast becoming a simple reflection of everyday life : a few get rich , the rest struggle along . 

  " You cannot blame those individuals who have cashed in " , says Probyn , " they're simply taking advantage of the system . 

  They'd be fools not to . 

  However I do not have a rugby-related job nor even a rugby-related car . 

  So when I have to weigh up whether I can afford to trade in my battered old VW and think of those who have a BMW or Mercedes , then you begin to wonder at the sense of it all . 

  " Obviously certain players in certain positions will always be a more attractive proposition to sponsors or advertisers than those of us who inhabit the less glamorous parts of the field . 

  However without the grunter there would be no ball for the others to run with " . 

  Run With The Ball was the name of the England squad's promotional campaign during the World Cup . 

  It was hoped to make between 5-10,000 for each player . 

  In return for the presence of players at various corporate functions the RFU's elite sponsors would contribute monies to the development of the game as well as to the players' pool . 

  So far Probyn has not been to impressed with the results . 

  " We've had about 1,000 each " , he says . 

  " I've no idea what has happened to the rest . 

  We will probably find out in due course but it has been a disappointment . 

  Par of me could not give a monkeys about the entire operation . 

  But another part is determined that if there is a few bob about then I want my share " . 

  He may be approaching 37 , but durable England tighthead prop Jeff Probyn has no plans to give way to " the fresh-faced kids " just yet . 

  Probyn recognises that whenever there is money about , then the potential for bad blood creeping in is always there . 

  He insists that at the moment there is no such point of friction within the England camp . 

  " The whole issue of money in the game is , in England at any rate , a new one . 

  Things are sill being sorted out . 

  It would be nice to believe that the International Board could sort it out , but they do not seem to want to . 

  It may be that the England management themselves will have to draw up a code of conduct in order to keep everyone happy . 

  Me feeling is that there should only be team promotions and that the money should be split . 

  " I've no moral objections to being actually paid to play . 

  My reservation is that I do not think the game could sustain it . 

  Of course the top boys would be all right . 

  But what about Redbridge RFC around the corner from me in East London . 

  They will not survive if they have to pay . 

  In fact , never mind them , I do not think some of the first-class London sides would survive . 

  So what would you get ? 

  A few clubs with all the money and all the best players . 

  The rest would go bankrupt . 

  " As I've said there's nothing wrong with money in itself . 

  But there is , as we know from work , a price to pay . 

  Already the game has a higher profile . 

  As that happens so the tabloid press get interested in the game . 

  How long before we read about " Will Carling In Love Shock With Savile Row Taylor ? " 

  Look what happened to Wade Dooley last year . 

  He gave Doddie Weir a whack and he's vilified by the press for three weeks afterwards , some of them suggesting that he was not fit to be a policemen . 

  It's absurd . 

  " How long before we get drugs in the game ? 

  In fact , they're already down there in South Africa by the look of it . 

  I am pretty sure that we're clean in the Northern Hemisphere . 

  But if you up the financial incentive to achieve , then that too might change " . 

  Much has changed in Jeffrey Probyn's time in the game . 

  In essence he has not . 

  Off the pitch he's in the reproduction furniture business . 

  On it he is very definitely the genuine article . 

  And remember : if you see someone swinging a punch at him come next January in the Five Nations then you know that England are on top again . 

  The update on DAD'S ARMY 

  They think it's all over -- but it is not yet . 

  A new international season looms -- England play Canada at Wembley on October 17th -- and still official retirement notices have to be received from Dooley , Winterbottom , Webb or Probyn . 

  Most people through that the four would join Rory Underwood and Simon Halliday and bow out at the top , having achieved the historic second Grand Slam . 

  They are still with us . 

  The only old-timer to be pensioned-off appears to be Mick Skinner , and that was someone else's decision , not his . 

  Geoff Cooke left him out of the first international squad gathering on the grounds that Skinner had dropped down a division to play with Blackheath and therefore was obviously not too bothered about his international prospects . 

  Skinner , quite rightly , was not too happy . 

  Mike Teague would also be put out if his comeback with second division Moseley were to go so well that he's in contention for a place . 

  Who would write off a player of his stature ? 

  When Geoff Cooke was asked last season about who would be available to him he suggested that he would not be too interested in players pledging themselves only to one final swansong against South Africa in November . 

  Cooke wanted to build for the future . 

  He soon realised that the only relevant future is , as the old cliche has it , the next game . 

  He will be delighted to have the old hands to call on . 

  There's no doubt that the street-wisdom of the English forwards has been of huge value to them . 

  England should stick by the tried and trusted and not just in the short-term . 

  At the moment pretenders to the forwards' crowns are in short supply . 

  Who would go into the second row ? 

  Nigel Redman ? 

  Martin Haag or Martin Johnson ? 

  Simon Dear of Harlequins perhaps ? 

  No-one has yet made a significant case for inclusion . 

  Of course the argument runs that until they're given a run no-one knows quite what they can do . 

  Look at the impact made by Paul Ackford for example . 

  There comes a point when new players have to be drafted in . 

  But only at the moment when they have proven themselves to be better than the incumbent . 

  If England , with four or five new faces in the side , were to lose to South Africa , then the blow to morale would be considerable . 

  Confidence has been the critical factor in England's success these past two years . 

  You do not acquire it overnight ; but you can lose it overnight . 

  Who will linger longest ? 

  Dad's Army and waiting for the final push -- ( l-r ) Hill , Teague ( obscured ) , Winterbottom , Dooley , Probyn and Ackford ( the only one to have retired so far ) . 

  SOUTH AFRICA 

  ... and MICKEY MOUSE as Official Mascot ! 

  They may have proved naive on the field of play but , says JOHN ROBBIE , the two emphatic defeats did the Springboks less harm than the myopic selection of the old guard to manage the coming tour to Europe . 

  Stunned disbelief followed by panic . 

  That would just about sum up the general South African reaction to the record 26-3 defeat by Australia . 

  " Heads must roll " screamed the headlines in a paper that had , before the game , seemed to agree with the selection of the national side . 

  It was all gloom , doom and despondency . 

  The South Africans were well beaten by the All Blacks , murdered by the Aussies . 

  The facts are as simple as that . 

  No excuses are offered . 

  Congratulations to the victors . 

  In many ways the results are the best thing that could have happened and all is certainly not lost . 

  First , let us look at the buildup to the tests . 

  The Australian World Champions and also the All Blacks came to South Africa fresh from the nail-biting Bledisloe Cup series having both had warm-up visits , from Scotland and Ireland respectively . 

  In addition , New Zealand had enjoyed the Centenary Series . 

  The players were tired , sure , but were able to lift themselves for one-off tests against South Africa . 

  In comparison South Africa had played a few unconvincing trials fitted into the domestic Currie Cup programme . 

  The proposed warm-up tour had been cancelled . 

  The good news is , therefore , that despite having been beaten by better sides , improvements are certainly to be expected . 

  The pressure is off South African players . 

  No , they are not the real world champions ( a ridiculous claim in the first place ) . 

  Yes , technically South Africa has fallen behind . 

  However , potentially the players are every bit as good as are their opponents . 

  Realising that potential should be challenging -- and fun . 

  Perhaps it would be fairer to judge South African rugby at Twickenham in November when South Africa will have had a build-up comparable to that of the visitors who won so well . 

  That would seem to be most appropriate strategy for the wounded SARFU would not it ? 

  Look to the future by maximising all potential both on and off the field . 

  Imagine therefore the surprise when the tour officials were named . 

  First came Professor Johan Claassen , the legendary South African lock of the Fifties and Sixties and less than legendary manager in New Zealand in 1981 . 

  His original appointment this year was also as manager . 

  This has now been modified to that of SARFU representative , whatever that means . 

  Selector Abie Malan will be manager and John Williams is coach . 

  Then came the news that Williams will not be getting the assistant he wanted . 

  Despite having coached Northerns so well in tandem with Williams in the late Eighties , Eugene Van Wyk was refused and Ian Kirkpatrick , who has not coached at provincial level for at least a decade , has been named . 

  Kirkpatrick is a marvellous rugby man , but surely his expertise is with the development of youngsters he enjoys so much . 

  Rumours about that Van Wyk -- and therefore such successful current coaches as Harry Viljoen of Transvaal and Natal's Ian McIntosh -- were not considered because they never wore the green and gold . 

  It's a ludicrous proposition . 

  As a local paper pointed out , such thinking would have prevented Bob Dwyer from coaching Australia . 

  One thing that was clear from the visit of the Aussies is the importance of public relations . 

  Despite the intensity of the tour , the pressure for information and the interest by everyone , the Aussies came through with flying colours . 

  They were relaxed and open and the presence of Greg Campbell , a name well known to Rugby World &amp;amp; Post readers , was a blessing . 

  Accurate and pertinent information was prepared by Campbell , a professional rugby journalist , and made available to the same breed . 

  Interviews were arranged , players were briefed and , even in the emotional and crowded dressing room after the test , Campbell kept a cool head and handled things perfectly . 

  Visiting journalists and TV crews were helped . 

  He had his job and did it exceptionally well . 

  South Africa have named for the same job , not a professional journalist , but Dr. Nick Labuschagne , a man who has just been ousted as President of the Natal Rugby Union . 

  He is an extremely nice man and was seen to be a successful and popular president , although his name was linked to allegations that certain transactions were not totally above board . 

  The question is whether he is the right man for the sensitive media liaison portfolio . 

  A paper suggested that , in keeping with the selection of the management team , Mickey Mouse should be adopted as the official mascot . 

  Nice men all but surely not the management for South Africa's first major tour since 1981 . 

  Another body blow to South African morale was the decision by Jannie Breedt not to make himself available for the tour . 

  He has played in Sicily for the past few years and has decided to renew his contract . 

  While South Africa tour , Breedt will be playing and coaching Italy . 

  Mind you , given recent developments there is now some doubt concerning the tour itself . 

  The whole anthem affair has been dealt with and the minute's silence at Newlands went some way to repairing the damage of Ellis Park . 

  In a country where gestures are important , the official playing of the anthem at Ellis Park was insensitive to many people who had seen the very acceptance of the tours as a major compromise . 

  The unsavoury bickering between Transvaal President Dr. Luis Luyt , the ANC and the SARFU over whether or not playing the anthem broke a formal agreement or not tended to cloud the issue . 

  It was a row South African rugby could have done without . 

  The development programme is also a sensitive issue . 

  Throwing money at the problem is surely not the way to convince people of sincerity . 

  Although work is being done amongst the underprivileged one gets the impression that the real commitment shown by cricket -- and Dr. Ali Bacher in particular -- is lacking . 

  Morne Du Plessis has been involved in private work in this area . 

  Perhaps he is the man to galvanise things . 

  Nobody doubts the honest endeavour on the field , but will that be undermined by off-field shenanigans ? 

  S. A. -- DO WE HAVE LIFT OFF ? 

  Rugby is a religion in South Africa . 

  But , it is that very fascination -- bordering on fanaticism -- with the game that has turned the Afrikaner sport into a political football , as the All Black and Wallaby tourists found out . 

  But , asks NICK CAIN , can the World Cup organisers allow themselves to let South Africa's intense love of the sport blind us to the fact that , unless political and economic stability are rapidly established , giving the tournament to a country in turmoil could have massive repercussions . 

  Do we have lift-off ? 

  If we are talking about the Cape Canaveral school of lineout " jumping " favoured in South Africa the answer would be an unequivocal , yes . 

  But the stakes are so much higher than the mere semantics of the laws relating to lifting at the lineout . 

  They are about South Africa's suitability as the hosts of the 1995 World Cup and by implication the role of sport , and rugby in particular , in the economic and political future of the country . 

  The troubled waters of South Africa's over state have impinged -- quite correctly -- upon its sporting consciousness for as long as most of us can remember . 

  The recent tours of the Republic by New Zealand and world champions Australia demonstrated that it still continues to do so -- and how . 

  However much you may have heard , without actually going there , it is difficult to appreciate just how far rugby is woven into the warp and woof of South African society . 

  The disproportionate hold it has on the psyche of white South Africa was evident as soon as the two-pronged Antipodean assault on the previously unconquered Springbok citadel got underway . 

  For this writer it began when , shortly after stepping off the plane in Johannesburg , it became apparent that a few stitches sustained by the All Black winger Terry Wright in a training accident was deemed as worthy a front page news story as the continuous blood-letting in the Natal townships between rival ANC and Inkatha factions . 

  Throughout the tours rugby enjoyed this elevated profile but , overblown and sometimes fanatical as this media coverage might have appeared to outsiders , nothing in South Africa is quite what it seems when you peer beneath the surface . 

  The simple truth is that for the duration of the tours rugby became the political football in the power-broking struggle currently being played out between the various factions in South African politics . 

  The tours , after all , had only proceeded because the ANC's " government in waiting " had , following the drawing-up of pre-tour agreements , given the go ahead to the New Zealand and Australian Rugby Unions . 

  They in turn had then received the green light from their respective governments . 

  Eight years of isolation , broken only by the " buying-in " of the 1986 Cavaliers and 1989 World XV tours , subsequently came to an end in Durban when the New Zealanders kicked off their first official tour on South African soil for 15 years . 

  King's Park donned its best festive garb for the occasion and , self-indulgent though it appeared in the face of widespread township violence and the ANC's call for a two-day national strike , white South Africa decided to take a break from its myriad woes . 

  The battle for Southern Hemisphere supremacy was joined again amid the resurrected dream of blue skies , braiis ( barbecues ) and rugby . 

  The freshly unveiled Natal anthem " 15 Men of the Last Outpost " , a folksy ballad , was unwittingly to become a fitting epitaph for not only Natal but for nearly every other South African side that took the field against either set of Antipodeans . 

  In playing terms most of the South African provincial sides were indeed relics from the past . 

  Their tactical naivety and non-dynamic " donkeys-and-backs " approach made them no match for the super-fit " new age " stars from Down Under . 

  The All Black mean machine , battle-hardened if a little bruised from its Bledisloe Cup exertions , cut a clean swathe through South African provincial rugby . 

  After Natal ( 43-25 ) , they saw off a punchy Orange Free State outfit ( 33-14 ) , the disappointing Junior Springboks ( 25-10 ) and a heavyweight bunch of country boys representing Central Unions ( 39-6 ) . 

  Their hard-nosed " method " rugby and its ultimate reward when they blitzed the Springboks for the first two-thirds of the test at Ellis Park to build an unassailable 20-3 lead . 

  But , although they nearly ran out of steam and were forced to settle for a less than emphatic 27-24 margin of victory as the " Boks came back at them , Sean Fitzpatrick's side -- with the Jones boys Ian and Michael , Zinzan Brooke and Frank Bunce outstanding alongside their skipper -- were worthy of being the only New Zealand side ever to go through South Africa undefeated , albeit on an abbreviated tour . 

  The fall-out from the highly-charged display of white , predominantly Afrikaner , nationalism at Ellis Park , and the furore over the official playing of the " Die Stem , " anthem contrary to the tour agreements , rapidly marginalised the achievements of Laurie Mains and his " macho " crew . 

  Exit the All Blacks , enter the Wallabies -- in South African eyes the disputed heavyweight champions of the world . 

  It soon became a case of " Advance Australia Fair " on almost every front . 

  Initially the Australians showed that they were unprepared to be manipulated by quietly but firmly refusing to commit themselves to the ANC's extra-curricular initiatives for a Boipatong visit and the wearing of black armbands during matches . 

  The grasp of the " realpolitik " of the situation on the part of their administrators was impressive ( see pages 38 and 39 ) and that , combined with their own integrity in never wavering in their adherence to the pre-tour agreements , meant that for once sport could hold its head high in the fact of profound political pressures . 

  The tour subsequently went ahead , but the Wallabies did not let the grass grow under their feet as they waited for the ANC to make a decision . 

  Instead they fought the corner for multi-racial sport by taking themselves off to Zwide , a township near Port Elizabeth ( see pages 38 and 39 ) , where they held a coaching clinic for black and coloured youngsters . 

  This coming together at Dan Qeqe stadium was far more of a genuine gesture towards bridge building than most of the internal initiatives according to Malcolm Klaasen , the ex-SARU convenor of the Eastern Cape Veterans Association , and an outspoken critic of the lack of change wrought by the unification process . 

  Klaasen's contention that " the only integration that has gone on so far has been among the top officials " seemed to be borne out by the fact that we had to wait for the penultimate game of the tours to seen the first nonwhite player take the field . 

  To their credit the Springboks took a leaf out of the Wallaby book by holding their Friday training session before the test in a township for the first time ever . 

  The visit to Nyanga near Cape Town may have been tokenism , but at least it was a step in the right direction . 

  They failed to make anything like the sort of headway the following day when they met the Wallabies in the rain at Newlands . 

  Although the Australians , who had a magnificent second half , only pulled away to a resounding victory in the last ten minutes , the harsh truth is that the Boks never looked like scoring . 

  The double-headed defeat of the Boks sent shock-waves through the sporting community -- i. e. most of white South Africa -- the magnitude of which had not been felt since the 1974 Lions demolished the myth of Afrikaner rugby supremacy . 

  But although the argument over who were the real world champions was emphatically settled in favour of Nick Farr-Jones's side , the political machinations before , during and after the tours have made it painfully clear that rugby is a sideshow -- albeit one with significant political influence -- in the scheme of things in South Africa . 

  In the light of the Boipatong massacre and now the shootings in Bisho in the Ciskei it must be clear to the International Board that a political solution must come before a rugby solution . 

  Much as I would love to see the 1995 World Cup help to kickstart the South African economy as overseas visitors pour in to fill impressive stadia and savour the beauty of the land , the facts are that as things stand rugby will be used as a political pawn . 

  Here's the scenario . 

  It's the World Cup quarter-final between South Africa and Wales at Ellis Park . 

  The ANC , frustrated with the continual political impasse , call for a mass rally near the stadium on the afternoon of the match . 

  Afrikanerdom is out in force and on its way to the ground ... 

  It may be Africa , and life may be cheap by comparison with that in the Western world , but just try to imagine this happening at Twickenham or Cardiff Arms Park : as the car park revelry goes on late into the night a youth slips into an official marquee and steals some equipment from it . 

  Security guards spot him as he tries to make his getaway -- and shoot him dead . 

  The youth was black . 

  It happened at Kings Park , Durban , the night Natal played New Zealand . 

  Centre Tim Horan was a firm favourite with the black and coloured youngsters who showed up at the Wallaby coach-in held at the Dan Qeqe Stadium in the Zwide township near Port Elizabeth . 

  Naas Botha -- the hero of Nyanga -- after the Boks first-ever township training session . 

  WALLABY WONDERS WALK ON WATER ! 

  NEW LAWS 

  Nightmare in the making 

  Do not be fooled by the hugely entertaining test in South Africa -- it was only the brilliance of Australia that stopped this show piece game -- played under the new laws -- from turning into a shambles , says STEPHEN JONES ( Sunday Times ) . 

  If that dreadful mid-Atlantic " celebrity " who rummages through other people's houses in the appalling " Through the Keyhole " TV programme delved through the house of Australia rugby , he would find any amount of shimmering silverware -- the World Cup itself , the Bledisloe Cup , and so on -- but the contents would tell you nothing about the true greatness of the inhabitants . 

  There would be noting to indicate how compelling and sweeping is the style , how wonderfully well Nick Farr-Jones and Bob Dwyer and their men conduct themselves . 

  Nor do the trophies alone mark their finest achievements . 

  For me , the two glories of the current team , one of the greatest the world has seen , are two halves of rugby . 

  The first came during the World Cup semi-final in Dublin , where by their first-half performance , by the control and by the cutting edge of David Campese , they ravaged New Zealand . 

  The second came recently at Newlands , the imposing Cape Town stadium -- at least , it was imposing till they tore out large bits to install even more corporate hospitality guzzlers -- where by their second-half performance they imposed themselves on South Africa and crossed the final frontier of world rugby at a surging gallop . 

  On the latter occasion , the Wallaby control was even more praiseworthy because it was a foul Cape day with squelching underfoot . 

  And that control became positively wondrous when you consider the other altered circumstance -- in Dublin , the Australians were operating before rugby forgot its central themes , before it came charging off the tracks and awarded the put-in to the other team in indeterminate rucks and mauls -- turning rugby into an uncontrolled and frothy nothing . 

  At Newlands , the way in which Australia compensated judiciously , changing the plays , ploughing on through the mud with high kicks , by forcing the lineout , by their discipline and tactics around the fringes , was an object lesson . 

  Some people declared that it was a triumph for the new laws , bless them . 

  It was very far from that -- it was a brilliant but compensatory effort . 

  I would be not in the least surprised if that Wallaby performance goes down in history as the best given in the one year that the law lasts -- surely , even though players and referees will work their way round some of the problems , it will only last the year . 

  Certainly , Dwyer hopes to . 

  He never missed an opportunity to criticise the new ruck/ maul laws and he had an absolute right to do so -- because it is he who has found ways to minimise their dreadful effect , because he was never one of those coaches who sought refuge under the old laws , and because he is the finest coach in the world by results , demeanour and inspiration . 

  But wait a minute , Bob , someone said as he was giving his almost daily diatribe against the law change in South Africa . 

  Surely it was you Aussies who were behind the tranche of law changes ? 

  " If it was " , said Dwyer , " then no-one bothered to ask the Australian coaches or players " . 

  The final condemnation of the change is that no-one consulted formally these top men in the sport before passing the show-stopping law and , furthermore , that the lawmakers left so much still to be ironed out . 

  The first heroes in the battle to adapt to the damage are the referees at all levels who have sat down amongst themselves , worked out interpretations , decided what to ignore in the letter of the law ; and because the superior team can no longer launch sustained driving to sap the opposition , you find that inferior teams are still fresh as daisies at the end . 

  No final avalanche . 

  Even superior fitness hardly mattered a damn . 

  " The new law is a leveller " , said Dwyer in frustration . 

  And now , something else is dawning on us . 

  For the most part , what we saw in South Africa were the effects of the law in matches between teams of relatively high class on hard pitches with a dry ball -- and with relaxed interpretations of the laws . 

  Significantly , the home referees in south Africa and Sandy MacNeill and David Bishop , the two test referees , were prepared to wait and wait for the ball to emerge from rucks and mauls . 

  Hence , there were very few " turnovers " , perhaps only two in a game . 

  At least this muted , just by a little , the effects . 

  Judging from early games in this country , and especially by the dreadful Leicester v England match , our referees are going by the book and will blow rucks and mauls dead far more quickly . 

  There will be more turnovers ( more rucks and mauls ended without the ball emerging ) , more frustration . 

  Still more horrors -- if rugby under the new law is difficult to play and to control on a dry day in South Africa , imagine the effect in marshy old England in the mud and rain of January ; imagine the shambles the game will become at the lower levels in those conditions with the sanctuary of the next scrum no longer available to the team carrying the ball . 

  At best , it will become a ping-pong of kicking . 

  In his programme article for that Leicester v England match , Tony Russ of Leicester predicted that the new law , which intends to free up the game and lessen the effect of kicking , would have the opposite effect . 

  He was on the button . 

  It will have an opposite effect , and a drastic one . 

  " We're Number 1 , mate ! " 

  The undisputed champions of the world -- Bob Dwyer's Wallabies . 

  The coach celebrates the resounding 26-3 victory over South Africa at Newlands with ( l-r ) John Eales , Phil Kearns and Ewen McKenzie . 

  Hard pitches , dry ball ... and referees prepared to wait for it to emerge . 

  Northern Transvaal no.8 Adriaan Richter and Wallaby no.8 Sam Scott-Young await the verdict during the Wallabies' hard fought 24-7 win . 

  THE ONE THAT almost GOT AWAY 

  THE TESTS 

  All Black attack ! 

  A mighty occasion and a mighty tussle , despite being blighted by the " anthem affair " . 

  In a sense the scoreboard lied by suggesting that the Springboks had run New Zealand close . 

  The All Blacks , who took control of the game through a massive 23-11 lineout advantage and the athleticism of their pack , were in command for all but the final quarter . 

  Having established a 20-3 lead through tries by Zinzan Brooke , Kirwan and Timu they allowed South Africa back into the game . 

  With Botha calling the shots the " Boks demonstrated their strength at running first phase possession by scoring late tries through Gerber ( 2 ) and Muller before the clock curtailed their late assault . 

  Touch and go . 

  John Kirwan juggles with the ball as his Springbok counterpart , Pieter Hendriks , makes a despairing final attempt to stop the progress of the All Black winger . 

  BUCK'S BROADSIDE 

  Arrogant delusions dispelled by the All Blacks and Wallabies , South Africa have a hard row to hoe to get back to the top . 

  But , says WAYNE SHELFORD , much as it hurts , defeat was the best thing that could have happened ... 

  Defeat will do South Africa good . 

  I am sure that none of the Springbok players will have felt like that as they came off the pitch , but , in the long run , the losses will benefit them . 

  They may help to dispel some of the arrogant delusions prevalent in the country . 

  South Africa , particularly in the Australian test , were a long way off the pace . 

  Yet you still came across people who thought that South Africa would have won the last World Cup . 

  The return to the top will not be easy and it will not happen within the next 12 months . 

  It may not happen before the World Cup in " 95 . 

  It's easy to pinpoint what is wrong . 

  Putting it right will not be so easy . 

  If coaching were simply a matter of putting down on a piece of paper 10 points to improve , we'd all be world beaters . 

  Correcting faults takes time ; instilling good habits takes time ; and finding the right coaches as well as the right players to put all this into effect will take time . 

  South Africa have set about things the right way however . 

  Going on tour , exposing yourself to the best that there is , painful as it might be , is the only way to get better . 

  When North Harbour were aiming for the top in New Zealand it took four years of struggle -- getting beaten by the top provinces -- before we managed to make our own mark . 

  I think Northampton have had a similar experience . 

  The theory is always straightforward ; putting it into practice is not . 

  So , what is wrong with South African rugby ? 

  The deficiencies were fairly obvious . 

  The forwards are nowhere near dynamic enough . 

  It's all very well have big , strong guys , but no use at all if they're 10 metres behind the play . 

  South Africa had no-one of the athletic calibre of John Eales , Ian Jones or Michael Jones . 

  If they are to prosper they have to find them . 

  The back row in particular needs to be revamped ; speed is a more quality at international level than bulk . 

  Body positions , lineout techniques , defensive alignments , all need a good shake down . 

  The best coaches will recognise this and set to work . 

  That apart , South Africa did give the best two sides in the world a game . 

  Naas Botha has been written off after his performances . 

  I thought , however , that his tactical use of the ball in the game against NZ was excellent . 

  His kicking was off ; so what ? 

  We know what he can do in that department . 

  He'd be a fool to throw it all away now that SA are back in business . 

  A good tour and there might be another five years in him . 

  Of course the South Africans must start grooming back-up fly-halves . 

  Men not in Botha's mould , nor like some of the bangers I saw in some up-country games . 

  The youngsters should be given their head , encouraged to develop their all-round skills . 

  That is the way forward . 

  Certainly the ball skills of the three-quarters in the tests were impressive . 

  It will be tough for South Africa in France and England . 

  Of that there is no doubt , but the tour will undoubtedly be rewarding . 

  Off the pitch , too , South Africa has a lot of ground to make up . 

  The hotels and transport system are simply not up to scratch at the moment . 

  South Africa would struggle , as it stands , to host the " 95 World Cup . 

  The desire to change though is , I believe , there . 

  But it will not come easy . 

  AUSSIES RAISE THE STANDARD 

  THE POLITICS 

  The French Connection 

  When the Ellis Park anthem episode jeopardised the Wallaby tour , the diplomacy of ARFU president JOE FRENCH saved the day . 

  For the Australia media corps who covered the recent Wallaby tour of South Africa , the everlasting memory of Australian Rugby Football Union president Joe French will be his conducting an impromptu 11.00 pm press conference followed by another at 2.30 am in his hotel room dressed in a pair of shorts and a singlet . 

  The media corps were not dressed much better as they tossed on whatever was nearest after being woken from a deep sleep . 

  They arrived without shoes , their hair like birds " nests and bleary eyed wondering what all the fuss was about . 

  Little did they know that French , together with hard-working ARFU executive Bob Fordham , had been working for over 12 hours attempting to salvage the Wallaby tour after pre-tour conditions , such as the non-playing of national anthems , were inexplicably ignored at Ellis Park the previous day when South Africa celebrated its return to international rugby against the All Blacks . 

  The Ellis Park row had plunged the future of the Wallaby tour into grave doubt and for French it signalled the possible heartbreaking end to four years of endless and dedicated hard work to have rugby sanctions against South Africa lifted . 

  He may have been conducting a formal press conference in very informal dress at a most abnormal time . 

  But one thing for certain , as far as the tour was concerned , French was not going to be caught with his pants down . 

  He had fought too hard for too long to let this tour be abandoned only days from the test . 

  Few people know about the great lengths and the key behind the scenes roles French and Fordham played in South Africa's return to the international rugby scene . 

  Ever since the aborted rebel Wallaby tour to South Africa in 1987 , French had made it a personal goal to see the Springboks return to the international stage . 

  French began his campaign immediately after the rebel tour was cancelled when he , together with ARFU officials Norbert Byrne and Ross Turnbull , held discussions with the then Australian Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Bill Hayden . 

  This initial discussion led to further meetings and opened the doors to the mutual swapping of information . 

  Left : Joe French . 

  Above : White nationalism at full mast at Ellis Park as the flags unfurl and " Die Stem " is sung . 

  Eventually French had talks with the African National Congress sports spokesman , Steve Tshwete . 

  French recalled his first meeting with Tshwete and his delegation saying ; " They were pretty tough guys . 

  I remember saying to him " I have to look after my national sporting body " . 

  And he said " well Mr President , we have no rights " . 

  I was stumped . 

  " That was a very important meeting as I gained an understanding of what they wanted for rugby to be unified . 

  Tshwete was a supporter of rugby unification and he got the old South African Rugby Football Board and the South African Rugby Union together at the conference table " , said French . 

  With unification finally completed , Tshwete visited Australia earlier this year and the ARFU was given the green light by the ANC and by the Federal Government for inward and outward tours to South Africa . 

  The ARFU's decision to tour South Africa was not simply because sanctions had been lifted . 

  The reasons went much deeper . 

  " Firstly , the ARFU wanted to assist the new South African Rugby Football Union's development fund . 

  By touring South Africa , one third of tour proceeds will be spent on developing rugby in those areas which had previously been disadvantaged . 

  Secondly , the tour represented the last chance for some Wallaby players to ever tour South Africa " , said French . 

  The Boipatong massacre became the first major hurdle which rugby had to overcome and this led to the implementation of All Black and Wallaby tour conditions such a the minute's silence prior to each test , the display of peace and democracy signed at match venues and in match programmes , the non-playing of national anthems and the removal of any official flying of the South African national flag . 

  French was a guest in the VIP box at Ellis Park for the South Africa v All Black Test and he know there were to be immediate problems for the Wallaby tour the moment the first chord of Die Stem was struck . 

  " Eddie Tonks ( New Zealand Rugby Football Union chairman ) was sitting behind me and I turned and looked at him and we eyed each other . 

  We could not believe what was happening . 

  But Louis Luyt had deliberately and with malice aforethought stuffed things up " , recalled French . 

  " After the game Ebrahim Patel was terribly annoyed . 

  F. W. De Klerk was also there and he was annoyed and he had an animated talk with Tshwete in the corner of the room " . 

  The following day Patel telephoned French at the Burgerspark Hotel in Pretoria advising him the ANC's regional director had called a special meeting with the National Olympic Sports Congress for Monday morning recommending that the tour be cancelled . 

  Patel then drove from his Johannesburg home to Pretoria prior to the Wallabies' departure for Port Elizabeth to try and rescue the tour . 

  Telephone discussions resumed immediately French and Fordham checked into the Holiday Inn in Port Elizabeth . 

  As far as French was concerned , the Wallabies were in South Africa because the ANC had agreed to the tour and , if they withdrew their support , the team would return immediately to Australia . 

  SARFU had done little to try and rectify the damage created at Ellis Park so French and Fordham took the initiative prior to the special ANC meeting . 

  No longer could French and Fordham take a back seat advisory role . 

  " We had to spur them ( SARFU ) on . 

  SARFU had to distance themselves from the happenings at Ellis Park " , said French . 

  As a result of French's urging , a five point statement was then released by the SARFU at 1.30 am on the Monday morning , several hours before the special ANC-NOSC meeting , clearing the SARFU from involvement at Ellis Park . 

  In part the SARFU's statement read : " We wish to state publicly that , contrary to press reports , the executive of the SARFU did not authorize the playing of the national anthems of New Zealand and South Africa at the Ellis Park test . 

  " We regret in respect of the national anthems our undertaking has been violated and breached and we apologise unconditionally to anyone who has been offended by this breach " . 

  Left : Louis Luyt fertiliser magnate and President of Transvaal RU . 

  Immediately after his infamous singlet and shorts press conference , French and Fordham woke Wallaby manager John Breen , coach Bob Dwyer and captain Nick Farr-Jones to a meeting to inform them of the happenings over the previous 12 hours . 

  The Wallaby team hierarchy were convinced the tour would be aborted . 

  Farr-Jones went so far as to telephone his wife Angela in Sydney saying she should expect him home within days . 

  However , French and Fordham remained optimistic . 

  After their special meeting , the ANC then released a statement saying the tour was still hanging in the balance ad pointed the blame squarely at Louis Luyt . 

  But this was not good enough for French as he had to consider the Wallaby players who had a fixture 24 hours later against Eastern Province and the test with the Springboks four days later . 

  As a precaution to the tour being cancelled , the Wallabies were booked on flights back to Australia via London . 

  " We were not getting anywhere and the ANC said they were still to reach a decision . 

  I said to them it was placing the team and the ARFU in a terrible situation and I gave them a 5.30 pm deadline otherwise the tour was off . 

  WE had nearly all of the travelling world rugby media staying at the same hotel as the Wallabies and decisions had to be made " , he said . 

  The ANC then sent me a statement which , in my opinion , was not good enough . 

  I could not get through to Tshwete so I then called in the Australian Ambassador in Pretoria , Colin McDonald , to personally contact Tshwete and get a firm decision . 

  Colin was successful and the ANC advised him that the tour would proceed " . 

  It was a mightily relieved French who then issued a press statement to this effect . 

  He then added the rider ; " Out of this nettle of danger , we have plucked a flower " . 

  Two days later , following further investigations by the ANC , NOSC and SARFU into the Ellis Park controversy , the ANC formally and publicly stated it would continue to support the tour and the test between South Africa and the Wallabies at Cape Town . 

  Assisting the Wallabies' push for the tour to continue was the meeting ANC president Nelson Mandela held with French , Fordham , Farr-Jones , Breen and Marty Roebuck hours before the Ellis Park test . 

  Little did anyone know of the furore which was about to break six hours later at Ellis Park . 

  " We received work via the Australian Embassy that Mandela could not attend either test but wished to meet the Wallabies " , said French . 

  " He was terrific and spoke openly about how pleased he was that the tours had taken place . 

  He called in his full executive to meet us and I am sure at the end of the day that this meeting went a long way to the tour going ahead instead of being cancelled " . 

  S. A. R. U .'s side of the street 

  Current unification -- cosmetic or cast-iron ? 

  The playing feats of Danie Gerber , Naas Botha , Morne du Plessis and other famous Springbok stars have been praised , analysed and religiously recorded for posterity writes Chris Thau . 

  Their portraits adorn the posh dining halls of the South African stadia : Newlands , Ellis Park , Loftus Versfeld etc . 

  However , nobody has recorded the progress of the likes of Peter M'kata , Eric Majola , Solomon Mhlaba , Gassiem Jabaar , Bomza Nkohla , Salie Fredericks , Ronnie Louw , Cissie Damons , Lenny Mathews or Desmond Kramer , although virtually all of them were players of note , arguably the best of their generation . 

  The simple reason for which they failed to make the headlines and fire up the imagination of rugby pundits around the world is that they were blacks and coloureds in an apartheid-ridden South Africa . 

  They were all famous within their own communities , but non-persons outside them . 

  " M'kata was a natural , one of those geniuses that emerge from time to time in the game . 

  He could have gone all the way " his former coach Mahommed Aghredien said . 

  Aghredien , who played for SARU and is classified as coloured ( his father was Malayan and his mother Norwegian ) , has been working hand in hand with Bill Cunningham -- a back-row forward , who played for the Springboks on their 1959 internal tour -- to develop rugby in townships around Port Elizabeth for nearly two decades . 

  " Had the current changes taken place 10 years ago , many of the kids I coached in townships could have reached the top . 

  They were genuine Springbok material . 

  But they never had a chance . 

  I have been coaching black kids for more than 20 years . 

  In fact as rugby is concerned I am colour-blind : give me a rugby player , be it white , blue or yellow , with two hands , two legs and a bit of a brain and I love it " , Cunningham said . 

  " It's an uphill struggle to change the mentality of people . 

  There is resistance to change . 

  People still think in racial terms , whereas we are pioneering multi-racial rugby as a way of life . 

  We , myself and Bill , although we have been doing the same thing for more than 20 years , could not really work together . 

  I was classified as a coloured and he was white . 

  In fact , the last digit in identity book still tells you that I am not " white " . 

  But no-one cares about those things nowadays " , Aghredien added . 

  During their short stay in Eastern Province the Wallabies expressed an interest to come out to visit and possibly coach in a township . 

  Cunningham and Aghredien , together with the local rugby factotum -- Dan Qeqe , a legend in his own lifetime -- made the venture possible . 

  When the Wallabies arrived at the " Dan Qeqe " ground named after the inspired player , administrator and community leader who convinced Ford-USA to put money up front to finance it , and inspired the township youngsters to build it , they were met by an expectant crown of youngsters . 

  The Wallabies coaching clinic was a great success and a tribute to the efforts made by the likes of Dan Dan Qeqe . 

  The man himself , is quite outspoken about past and present , but mostly about the future . 

  " We did not have this ground in the'70s . 

  We were practising on a municipality ground , but we were kicked out of it because we refused to play against England . 

  Rightly or wrongly we believed that as long as we were discriminated in every walk of life it would be absurd to pretend that everything was OK in rugby and play against the English and then go back to the township . 

  However , there is a future in the current unification process if everyone is sincere . 

  This process should bring whites and blacks together , from an early age . 

  The racial integration must be made natural , to avoid the divisions of apartheid , blacks , coloured , whites etc . 

  We blacks and coloured are seen as aliens from another country by our fellow Port Elizabeth citizens . 

  That's where we must concentrate in rebuilding the fabric of society " , said Qeqe . 

  Hands across the Great Divide ? 

  Dan Qeqe ( right ) greets EP president Trevor Jennings . 

  TAKE IT AWAY CHAMP ! 

  THE TESTS Wallaby wipe-out ! 

  Throughout last season's World Cup the rest of the world got used to seeing South Africans proudly parading their " Springbok World Champions " banners . 

  Come testing time , though , it was a different story altogether as Farr-Jones's side put on an awesome second-half display in the rain and mud at Newlands . 

  The charge that they were World Champions by default clearly rankled with the Wallabies . 

  It showed as they rattled up 18 unanswered points in the last 10 minutes -- including a 50th test try for Campese -- to inflict the Boks' heaviest-ever defeat , and give their retiring skipper a rousing send off . 

  Clutching at thin air . 

  South African blindside Wahl Bartmann misses the boat as Wallaby scrum-half Nick Farr-Jones feeds his backline in the crushing Australian victory in Cape Town . 

  PLAYER OF THE MONTH 

  NEIL BACK 

  Off the field you may not notice him . 

  He's smaller than most forwards , quietly spoken and unobtrusive of manner . 

  On the field you can not fail to notice him . 

  Lightning quick , fearless in the tackle and always in the thick of the action . 

  Neil Back was one of the few stars to emerge from the England " B " tour to New Zealand . 

  Even the Kiwis were staggered by his bravery in going for the ball on the floor . 

  Meet the Player : 

  Age : 23 . 

  Ht : 5f10i . 

  Wt : 13st 10 lbs . 

  Position : Flanker . 

  Honours : Eng . 

  Schools/ Colts/ U-21/ B . 

  Meet the Man : 

  Job : Life Assurance , AXA Equity and Law , Coventry 

  Status : Single 

  Hobbies : Squash , badminton 

  Most important quality needed for success : 

  Confidence in own ability , dedication , and , as I now realise after my shoulder injury , luck . 

  Reflections on career so far : 

  Just a natural , competitive sense of frustration not to have won full honours , but I am not complaining . 

  If England had not been so successful , then perhaps I would be moaning . 

  Opinion of other sports : 

  It would be nice to earn 15,000 for playing sport , but it's not an issue with me . 

  What would most like to see happen in the game : 

  All unions should abide by same laws of the pitch . 

  How do you get away from the pressure : 

  I do not see training and playing almost full-time as pressure . 

  I've grown up with this type of regime . 

  ENGLAND ROUND-UP . 

  For your bookshelf 

  WITH the new season getting underway and Christmas beginning to loom , there has been a plague of books clogging up RW&amp;amp;P's mailing system , some of them annual publications , others one-offs . 

  The most eagerly awaited one , as ever , was the authoritative Rothman's Rugby Union Yearbook , edited by Steve Jones ( of Sunday Times fame ) , and now in its 21st year . 

  Published by Headline and costing 14.99 , this tome is as invaluable as ever . 

  Talking of annual tomes , the Courage Club Directory and the RFU Handbook -- bricklike publications if ever there were two -- have also just surfaced again . 

  The RFU Handbook is as interesting and informative as ever and is available at 8 from the RFU Shop , while the Courage book has been divided into five separate books ( National Leagues and the Midland , South West , London &amp;amp; South East and North divisions ) . 

  For anyone involved in the game at the grass-roots level , the divisions books are invaluable -- they give a pretty comprehensive run-down of every club in the country by division -- and only cost 3.50 in their revised form , 9.99 for the National Leagues book . 

  The RFU sponsored yearbook , edited by Barrie Fairall of the Independent and published by Harrington Kilbride , is also due to hot the shelves at some stage over the next month or so and is very good value , as is the Whitbread Rugby World Yearbook , edited by Adrian Stephenson and Ian Robertson and produced by Leonard Associates -- a rip-roaring book even if the staff of RW&amp;amp;P ( all contributors to this fine , fine publication ) say so . 

  More news come publication . 

  Two training books have also come to light this month . 

  The first is called Tactics of Success : Rugby , and is written by Chris Jones of the Evening Standard ( Ward Lock , 4.99 ) . 

  The bulk of the book is 30 main moves , with examples from actual games . 

  The blurb says that this book was written " to help people learn from their elders and betters " . 

  The other coaching book which will help us all develop the tactical subtlety and expertise of your Grant Fox or Michael Lynagh is Winning Rugby by new Richmond coach Roger Uttley ( Stanley Paul , 9.99 ) . 

  Well illustrated and informative , if Richmond win all their games by at least 30 points then buy it quickly before stocks run out . 

  Longer qualifying time ? 

  THE RFU , horrified by the 12 departures from Gloucester this summer , may well extend the qualifying period for players who change clubs beyond the present four months . 

  Speaking at the launch of the Rothmans Rugby Union Yearbook 1992-93 RFU president Danie Serfontein warned that this could happen if the union feels that it can not put an end to illegal inducements , which he described as being " widespread " . 

  At the same function RFU secretary Dudley Wood said that the problem is worse in France , where the national club championship is the dominating force , whilst the president added that the RFU had twice been prepared to act against clubs but held back for lack of clinching evidence . 

  The Way Ahead 

  FOLLOWING on from last month's report on club management ( p79 of September's RW&amp;amp;P , Jim Saker of Loughborough University Business School , co-author with Sarah Massey , has reminded us that copies of the full report ( price 15 inclusive of postage &amp;amp; packing ) or the synopsis ( 3 ) and information on training workshops can be obtained from him at Loughborough University School . 

  Barbarian Help for Stoke Mandeville 

  THE BARBARIAN F. C . 

  have a small stock remaining of their Centenary Souvenir Dinner Brochures , and would be happy to send them out to keen rugby folk in return for a cheque for just 1.50 , which will be used to raise funds for the paraplegic centre at Stoke Mandeville . 

  Send your order to Casdec Ltd . , 

  and you shall receive a special piece of rugby history . 

  The Young England Rugby Club has been in existence for two years but is now being relaunched as a major part of the RFU youth initiative with its own clear aims and ambitions . 

  It is a major project for the RFU , with a recruitment drive to match . 

  Half a million application forms have been printed and are being sent all around the country , via over 1,000 blubs , nearly 3,000 schools and through the RFU youth development officers . 

  The club exists to support youth rugby in clubs and schools in this country . 

  It is an important forum for RFU communication with young rugby players , as it represents partnership rather than authority . 

  It is important that the members feel involved in their own club . 

  To be an effective tool the club must appeal to the target membership . 

  Therefore the role of the Young England Rugby Club is to enhance involvement in youth rugby by creating a direct link with the very top of the game , and that means the RFU and the England squad . 

  The club exists as a reinforcement for all the work already being done by the RFU youth development team , the counties , the rugby clubs and schools . 

  Through the club magazine , Tryline , it will also be an additional communication vehicle for their work and Will Carling has been asked to be the first honorary president of the club as he lead the very team which embodies the aspirations of the club itself . 

  It is hoped that the club will quickly reach a membership of 20,000 , with a year on year increase after that . 

  It is open to anyone aged between 6 and 16 , girl or boy , who wished to join . 

  The annual membership fee is 15 , ( there is a 3 enrolment fee for new members ) and the new members' package consists of a Gilbert rugby ball , with Will Carling's signature , a Young England Rugby Club T Shirt , a membership badge , a personalised membership card , and four editions of the Young England Rugby Club magazine " Tryline " . 

  Applications are available from the Young England Rugby Club Office . 

  England captain Will Carling , the honorary president of the Young England Club , shows off the new national kit at the club's launch at Twickenham . 

  The club's aim is to have 20,000 members within the year . 

  Flowering'Quins 

  EVEN though the country is in recession leading rugby clubs seem to encounter few difficulties in attracting sponsors . 

  One of the latest to succeed in that direction are Harlequins with the announcement of help to the tune of 350,000 over the next four seasons from Flowering Original , an offshoot of the Whitbread beer company , which already sponsors the Welsh Heineken Leagues . 

  An added bonus for " Quins is a kit agreement with Canterbury from New Zealand covering three seasons . 

  The sponsorship money will be used to upgrade facilities at the Stoop Memorial Ground because , according to chairman Roger Looker , " We recognise we have a long way to go towards what we consider to be adequate facilities , particularly if we sustain our growth " . 

  Winters in S. A. 

  WITH the forthcoming visit by the South Africans looming large , the RFU have taken the opportunity given them by the All Black and Wallaby tours to South Africa to get in some early homework on the Boks . 

  You might think that there would be a long line of officials queuing up to undertake such a testing spying mission -- and apparently there was . 

  So who did the RFU choose to go on their look-see mission ? 

  Step forward openside flanker Peter Winterbottom of Quins , England and -- in the recent past -- Natal and Transvaal . 

  WINDOW ON WALES 

  The " Phoney War " is over ! 

  The month of August is rugby's " phoney war " . 

  Club training intensifies , the odd trial match gets sneaked in , speculation about player movement increases , and the sevens tournaments get ( some ) players back in the swing . 

  The WRU ( bless " em ) are also good for the odd pronouncement . 

  By the time this is read the club season will be under way and we can assess how players adapt to the new laws . 

  Mike Hall , the new Cardiff captain , takes the Bridgend cover on the outside to touch down during the 15-5 quarter-final win during the recent Worthington Welsh Sevens at Cardiff Arms Park . 

  Sevens 

  This year's events attracted more official attention than before since Wales will be sending sides to the World and Hong Kong Sevens in 1993 . 

  Robert Norster confirmed " we plan to have people at all the major tournaments and I hope the players will realise they are being watched " . 

  One interesting name quickly out of his blocks ( o. k. , corny ) was former Olympic hurdler Nigel Walker , now retired from athletics and back with Cardiff for whom he played youth rugby . 

  He is " determined to make the first grade " . 

  He made a useful start in helping his club to victory in the Cardiff High School Old Boys Sevens where they beat a Nationwide VII 40-14 in the final . 

  Walker scored nine tries in the event , picking up the MVP ( shades of the US -- most valuable player ) award . 

  How he makes the transition from the open spaces of sevens to the narrow confines of the 15-a-side game remains to be seen . 

  The Cwmtawe Sevens , one of the premier events , was won by a Scottish Seven led by Craig ( I am staying at Melrose after all ) Chalmers , and including a Dods ( Michael , not Peter ) . 

  They beat Saracens ( including Justyn Cassell ) 22-18 in the Final . 

  A week later the now well established Great White Water Buffaloes triumphed in the popular Aberaeron Sevens beating London Welsh 28-14 in the Final . 

  Kevin Withey and Ceri Jonathon starred for the winners , Mark Douglas for the losers . 

  Meanwhile Welsh international Mark Titley and Newbridge wing Alun Harries were putting on a show for the selectors at the Bridgend Sevens in helping their invitation team " The Welshmen " ( management includes Messrs. Ring and Webb ) to victory 22-16 against Llanharan in the Final . 

  Player News 

  EVENTUALLY Mike Hall emerged as the choice of Alec Evans as Cardiff captain . 

  He was hardly General MacArthur in declaring " we will do better " . 

  In the meantime the " will-they , will not they " ( move ) scenario was played out right to the death . 

  Of the big fish , immediately pre-season David Evans had still not found a home . 

  He wants to be no.10 , but it seems Newport and Bridgend suggested 12 . 

  Paul Turner succumbed to the wooing of Steve Smith ( ugh ! ) and headed North ( well , to Sale ) . 

  David Watkins muttered " contingency plans " : fans muttered David Evans , Neil Jenkins ... 

  : Jenkins muttered " I cannot play and rugby , I am still banned " , but told the Western Mail he was " not moving from Pontypridd and that is final " . 

  Newport failed to get one international reserve prop -- Gloucester's Peter Jones but Llanelli claimed another in David Joseph from Swansea . 

  Union News 

  WALES nominated Alan Davies and Robert Norster for the positions of coach and manager to the British Lions in New Zealand next year , and both were invited for interview , but the appointments of McGeechan and Cooke were surely for rubber stamping only . 

  Glenbuterol -- buzzword of the month . 

  The fate of Welsh weightlifter Andrew Davies brought to mind the whispers about several of the Welsh pack of fairly recent vintage . 

  WRU's position from Dr. John Davies was recently quoted in the South Wales Echo : " It's virtually impossible to stop , and what those people who use steroids do not consider is the harm they do to themselves " . 

  The conclusion to the " Report on Anabolic Steroids " b ; y the Welsh Committee on Drug Misuse -- all sports -- notes " that steroids are being used in many parts of Wales , most of it without medical supervision . 

  Although in some circumstances it would appear that steroid use was very sophisticated , in many instances knowledge about drugs and injection technique was very poor " . 

  Food for thought . 

  Scotland have made good use of their Anglos over the years . 

  Wales are now getting in on the act . 

  Brigadier Rolph James and Peter Taylor at London Welsh are instrumental in developing a Welsh exiles format . 

  Part of the process is a triangular tournament with the Scots and Irish at U21 level . 

  This will be held at Old Deer Park , Richmond on November 7th/ 8th . 

  International referees Derek Bevan , Steven Hilditch and Jim Fleming will officiate . 

  All clubs received a letter warning them against organising practice or trial matches before the season officially starts on 1st September . 

  On behalf of the WRU Peter Owen said " If any club goes ahead with a practice match or trial match and we get to hear about it , then we will take immediate action " . 

  I heard of some . 

  Perhaps nobody tells the union , or have they one deaf ear ? 

  Finally , the union are now adopting the " Twickers line of " when you cannot beat Mike Burton , join him " . 

  In the knowledge that member clubs make international tickets available to " sponsors " for an appropriate fee , the union will now offer to buy back tickets from clubs at several times face value , and organise their own corporate hospitality . 

  One has to admire the ( unaccustomed ) realism behind the project . 

  Perhaps we can look forward to an extension of this realism into the players payments , drugs etc . 

  Player merry-go-round 

  THIS makes regular stops for people to get on and off . 

  Depending upon who you speak to and what you read , the following are included in this year's likely participants : 

  To Cardiff P Newbridge's New Zealand no.8 , Hemi Taylor , Bridgend's back-row man Owain Williams and Mike Budd , and Swansea wing Bleddyn Taylor . 

  To Newbridge -- Bridgend prop David Austin ( linking up with new forward coach , Gareth Williams ) , returning Newport wing Alan Harries , and Abertillery lock ( of the skyscraper tendency at 6ft 8ins ) , Emyr Williams . 

  To Newport -- Welsh U21s centre Justin Redrup , previously with Bristol , and potentially a big catch in Welsh outside-half David Evans from Cardiff ( or will he be the one that got away ? ) . 

  To Swansea -- Andrew Sutton exiting Newbridge , and Jason Ball following father Glen in departing The Gnoll . 

  From Pontypridd -- Jonathon Mason , Neil Eynon , and Mike Butts all returning to their previous club , Second Division Mountain Ash . 

  The loss of reserve scrum-half Robert Davies to Aberavon is on the cards . 

  This list is meant to be accurate at the time of writing . 

  However it is subject to offers , counter offers , whims and fallings out between now and the first Saturday of September . 

  The traditional trek to Cardiff Arms Park continues . 

  Watch out for those returning with tails between legs before mid-season . 

  Clearly they can not accommodate both Taylor and Williams , but Alec Evans is though to fancy the latter as captain , having previously been impressed with him playing club rugby in Queensland . 

  IRELAND 

  PICK-ME-UP FOR THE MEN IN GREEN ? 

  Irish rugbymen are no longer allowed to dream of improbable needs . 

  The record defeat on the summer tour to New Zealand showed the true dismal state of affairs . 

  But , as HEATHER KIDD reports , the rebuilding process should be underway by the time the Wallabies arrive . 

  Just what did Ireland learn during the tour to New Zealand ? 

  A little or a lot ? 

  Those questions will soon be answered thanks to the imminent arrival of undisputed world champions , Australia . 

  The awesome yellow-and-green rugby machine , cock-a-hoop following series victories over New Zealand and South Africa , will be a tough test for the Irish . 

  Ireland's captain in New Zealand , centre Phil Danaher , sees the Australia tour as providing a useful indicator as to the lessons learned Down Under , but does not anticipate an exact reading of the state of Irish play . 

  " A one-off international does not always show a true picture " , Danaher says . 

  Although he is predicting an interesting encounter between the two sides on October 31 , he views the unavailability of Nick Farr-Jones as a big plus for Ireland . 

  " Farr-Jones introduced a new dimension to Australia's play with his superb leadership and ability to control the game . 

  He will be a big loss to their team " . 

  Bearing in mind Ireland's First test performance against New Zealand in May Danaher gives his team a fighting chance against the Wallabies if they can gain an even share of possession . 

  " Against the All Blacks in Dunedin we won a lot of ball and very nearly won the match . 

  In the Second Test we struggled for possession and spent the whole match backpedalling " . 

  Irish tour captain Phil Danaher ponders his side's prospects . 

  One-off internationals tend to suit Ireland as both New Zealand and Australia can testify . 

  Few Australians and no Irish rugby supporter will ever forget Gordon Hamilton's try in the latter stages of the 1991 World Cup quarter-final . 

  Unfortunately for Ireland , the next try , Michael Lynagh's match-winning masterpiece , ended Ireland's dreams of World Cup glory . 

  Ireland assistant coach Gerry Murphy says that a realistic aim for this 1992-93 season is to try and win home matches or at least make it extremely difficult for an opposition team to win at Lansdowne Road . 

  " That's the way it used to be " , Murphy says , " and we ought to start from that premise " . 

  Murphy is a big fan of Australia rugby and its administration . 

  Following the tour to New Zealand , Murphy spent over three weeks in Australia studying their organisations . 

  " As in Ireland , rugby is a minor sport in most regions but the Australians are doing excellent player development work right through from their top schools players and U21s to senior level . 

  I see no reason at all why we cannot develop a similar system here . 

  We've always had good schools teams . 

  " Hopefully , following the tour to New Zealand , there is now a realisation of what needs to be done and of just how appalling we are in certain areas . 

  Our defence was very poor . 

  On certain occasions we got it right , but at other times it was a joke . 

  Club sides could have defended better " . 

  Despite the Second Test trouncing by New Zealand , Murphy says Ireland needed that match , " We'd have come home with a very mistaken picture of our true form if we'd left after the first international " . 

  But Murphy , like Danaher , is not unduly pessimistic about the future of the Irish game . 

  Several players developed well on tour , namely loosehead prop Nick Popplewell , second row Paddy Johns and backs Peter Russell and Vinnie Cunningham . 

  Success may not come swiftly but both men seem sure that it will arrive . 

  Several key factors will influence just how quickly Ireland can get its rugby back on the right track : fitness , tough competition and coaching . 

  Fitness requirements have altered dramatically in the last five years and the recent law changes make it even more imperative that players be fitter , more mobile and faster around the pitch . 

  New Zealand led the way , thanks to Jim Blair , in developing individual fitness requirements for each position . 

  Australia and England have heeded the call . 

  Ireland tagged along , trying to prove that playing on reserves of passion and pride were good enough . 

  The results speak for themselves . 

  Since returning from New Zealand the Irish squad has been working on fitness programmes under the guidance of Dr. John Kirwan , who heads the national training centre at Thomond College in Limerick . 

  It is already apparent that players are much fitter than at the same time last season . 

  The introduction of the All Ireland League competition two years ago gave the Irish club scene a much-needed boost but the hoped for flow-on effect to top level rugby has yet to be realised . 

  It is early days yet and the first division contains only nine teams ( next season the number will be upped to 11 ) which accounts for only a small percentage of Ireland's playing strength . 

  The provincial competition should be a valuable stepping-stone to international rugby . 

  Not only is it pitting top provincial players against each other but it is also providing them with opportunities to play even tougher , more competitive rugby . 

  Unfortunately , provincial rugby has become Ireland's poorest relation . 

  Last season , an overwhelming number of players declared themselves unavailable for the competition , a sure indicator that they set little score on the provincial matches and they think the national selectors do likewise . 

  This season a new team has been included in the competition which kicks off in mid-September . 

  Irish Exiles will join Connacht , Ulster , Leinster and Munster , and should provide tough opposition to the traditional Ireland-based sides . 

  It is expected that the Exiles team will be made up largely from players based in England , and possibly a few from France . 

  A London Irish player from Western Samoa , second row Mata'afa Keenan , is also expected to declare for Ireland and thus become eligible for the Exiles . 

  The introduction of foreign players to Irish teams is not new but the flood has been severely curtailed thanks to the IRFU's three-month probation period , a new ruling brought in at the end of last season . 

  Vigorously opposed by a number of clubs the IRFU has stood firm but ironically the flow of foreigners has continued , albeit in a different direction . 

  The club scene is now inundated with New Zealand and Australian coaches , due in no small part to the success of Garryowen , current AIL champions under their New Zealand coach , my husband , Murray Kidd . the IRFU is also getting in on the act with the appointment of former All Black captain and current Wellington coach Andy Leslie to its coaching panel . 

  Leslie arrives in Dublin mid-October for a three-month period . 

  He will be working alongside the union's director of coaching , assisting coaches and coaching coordinators through to U21 level . 

  It's not a giant step , but any demonstration of a willingness to accept outside assistance must be seen as a positive move . 

  The Irish hierarchy are not anticipating a miraculous recovery to form this season . 

  Such an expectation would be unrealistic . 

  But the game's top men are hoping they can devise a constructive plan for improvement so that the awfulness of the past few seasons might soon be no more than a bad dream . 

  Down but not out . 

  Fullback Jim Staples received a helping hand , but it will take more than the magic sponge to get the Irish side back on its feet . 

  IRISH REPORT 

  with Sean Diffley 

  IN exactly 12 months time Dublin will stage the International Golden Oldies festival when 6,000 of the seer and mellow generation will furnish teams for what is expected to be the biggest celebration yet . 

  In Perth in 1991 there were 162 teams taking part but Bryan O'Neill , the director of the Irish operation , has already received entries for 144 teams -- and there are still 12 months to go . 

  Bryan was manager of the Irish teams which played in 1981 at Long Beach , in 1985 in London and in the 1991 Perth Festival , and he says : " They were wonderful events , all of them , but we are planning in Dublin to make 1993 the jewel in the crown " . 

  This eighth international festival takes place between Saturday , September 25 to the following Saturday , October 2 and is sponsored by a goodly collection including Heinz , the Irish Independent newspaper group , Guinness and the Irish Tourist Board -- Bord Failte . 

  Tony O'Reilly , who has scored a try or two in his time around the world , is the motivating force as far as Heinz and the Independent are concerned , and Guinness , of course , are the ever-present force in Irish sporting events . 

  Gullivers are looking after the travelling arrangements and the widespread tentacles of the Irish Tourist Board make it certain that golden oldies all over the world have got to hear about the festival . 

  One of the big " selling points " is that the playing centre of the festival is at Belfield the large and leafy and green university campus ( University College Dublin ) , with all the 20 playing grounds adjoining . 

  And of the expected 6,000 visitors , 1,200 can be accommodated in the nearby students' dormitory area . 

  And Belfield is less than 20 minutes frequent bus service to the city centre . 

  And plenty of excellent hotels are within minutes of Belfield . 

  Recently the International Secretariat of the Golden Oldies was in Dublin to run the rule over the arrangements and all the indications were that the officials were pleased with all they saw . 

  The official visitors included Bryan Craies from Auckland , who is the world chairman , Jeff Butterfield from London , Alan Forno ( Australia ) , David Graham ( Canada ) and Mike Scully ( USA ) . 

  All enquiries relating to the festival can be addressed to Festival Director . 

  The seven-day programme with each team playing at least three matches includes a spectacular opening ceremony , a gala welcome party with buffet and Irish cabaret , and a Grand Finale Gaelic dinner . 

  Those will be the main highlights of an interesting few days . 

  But rigid timetables will be kept to a minimum . 

  The emphasis is on relaxation . 

  STRANGELY , the national coach of the Irish teams down the years has had little direct contact with the four provincial coaches . 

  But Ciaran Fitzgerald and manager Noel Murphy met the four provincial coaches recently , and a closer rapport has been devised . 

  They are George Hook ( Connacht ) , David McMaster ( Ulster ) , Garrett Fitzgerald ( Munster ) and Jim Glennon ( Leinster ) . 

  Ciaran Fitzgerald says that the purpose was to standardise fitness programmes for the players and avoid repetitious work , and to seek to avoid clashes with provincial and national squad sessions . 

  " But even more so would be the benefit of their experiences which will be invaluable to me at national team level " . 

  Fitzgerald believes that coaches will now be in a position to work to a common pattern and not pull against each other " like spancelled goats " . 

  Fitzgerald feels that the provincial coaches can act , too , as eyes and ears for his own selectors . 

  Surprisingly , it has taken a long time to arrange something that most would have considered to be basic . 

  Chasing James Bridie's dream 

  James Bridie had the Anglo-Scots summed up , though nothing to do with his work on those notorious Edinburgh grave-robbers , Burke and Hare . 

  The early-century playwright said that he did not rate highly the Scot who had succeeded in becoming an Englishman unless his rugby was good . 

  Before and after Bridie's pronouncement Anglo-Scots have been striving to do well on the international field at home . 

  J. P . 

  Davidson was the first Anglo-Scot to play international rugby ; the first of the Royal Indian Engineering College forward's two caps was against England in 1873 , still in the days of 20-a-side , and rarely since then have the exiles not been represented in Scotland's team . 

  Iain Laughland , for one , has gone on from being a long-serving cap from London Scottish to be the exiles' representative on the Scottish Rugby Union committee and , ex officio , chairman of the Anglo-Scots' committee . 

  In looking back to his playing days , you can not think of him without Jim Shackleton . 

  Similarly , Mike Campbell-Lamerton and Frans ten Bos . 

  Remember also Norman Bruce , Peter Stagg , Alastair McHarg , Bill Cuthbertson , Ian McGeechan and the Biggar cousins . 

  Think further back to the famous Oxford three-quarter line of Iain Smith , Phil Macpherson , George Aitken and A. C. Wallace . 

  Sole -- once an Exile 

  Iain Milne , Heriot's much admired and respected Bear , was briefly an Anglo-Scot with Harlequins . 

  Another famous prop , David Sole , captain in the memorable Grand Slam in 1990 , was first capped out of English rugby , while he was with Bath . 

  Like Milne , Ken Scotland , that classic attacking fullback a generation before his time , was an Anglo-Scot , as well as a Herioter . 

  Despite all that those and others have contributed to Scottish rugby , the exiles have had a tempered love-hate relationship with us back home . 

  Anglo-Scots had a theory -- perhaps justified by Bridie's remark -- that they had to be twice as good as a home-bred player to break through into the national team , whereas those North of the Border believed the corollary . 

  Intermittently , after 1948 , the Anglo-Scots came together to play as a team , usually against a home district . 

  Yet the exiles had no structure of their own . 

  Their teams were chosen by the national selectors . 

  Small beginnings 

  All that changed , though , a dozen years ago . 

  The Anglo-Scots now field an under-21 team . 

  It had small beginnings when Ian Muir , formerly with Cambuslang and West of Scotland , took a team north for a game against Edinburgh at Murrayfield in November 1984 . 

  Occasional fixtures followed against the home districts , and the exiles entered the under-21 championship in 1989 . 

  They now have sponsorship in their own right from School Book Fairs . 

  Not content with that championship the Anglo-Scots have joined their Welsh and Irish counterparts in holding a triangular under-21 tournament at the London Welsh ground on the weekend of November 7 and 8 . 

  The sponsorship and the three-way tournament are developments that Ansen Westbrook , the under-21 Anglo-Scots' secretary , can talk of with great enthusiasm . 

  With a committee base , senior and under-21 , the Anglo-Scots have been able to spread their selectors' scope wide . 

  Their spy network , like a mixture of the CIA , M15 and GCHQ , searches the length and breadth of England and Wales . 

  They dig deep especially to maintain the under-21 resources . 

  Yet they are never satisfied . 

  They are convinced that other players with Scottish connections are there to be found , and like the Irish and Welsh , the Scottish exiles have launched an appeal to attract players will Scottish qualifications . 

  Fulton Paterson , the Anglo-Scots' secretary , and Ansen Westbrook eagerly await news of any newcomers . 

  Who knows a modern equivalent of the Oxford three-quarter line may be waiting to be found . 

  SCOTTISH NOTES 

  GRANT FARQUHARSON , Gary Armstong's deputy at Jed-Forest , has joined Gala so that he can be more certain of playing in First Division rugby . 

  For the same reason Derek Stark , Ayr's Scotland " B " wing , has switched to Boroughmuir . 

  ERIC PAXTON , Kelso's former international flanker , will be coaching the South's U21 team this season . 

  His assistant will be Rob Moffat , who retired last season ad the Scottish School's coach . 

  AUSTRALIA 

  With the next World Cup due to be held in less that three years time the Wallaby coach and skipper warn that 

  " S. A. ... needs to improve infrastructure " -- FARR-JONES 

  Several leading Australian rugby identities have raised doubts about South Africa's ability to stage the 1995 World Cup . 

  They have publicly expressed their concerns after witnessing events first hand when travelling throughout South Africa during the Wallabies' whistle-stop two-week tour in August . 

  Their concerns are not centred on stadiums but focused rather on the off-field , non-political areas such as hotels , communications and domestic travel . 

  Wallaby skipper Nick Farr-Jones , Australian Rugby Football Union executive member Ron Meagher and Queensland Rugby Union executive director Terry Doyle are worried that South Africa does not have the necessary infrastructure to cope with the huge demands the World Cup will place on the country . 

  Farr-Jones was the first to voice his concerns on arrival in Sydney after the Wallabies beat the Springboks 26-3 at Cape Town's Newlands Stadium . 

  Farr-Jones said South Africa needed vastly to improve its infrastructure to handle the pressures of the 1995 World Cup . 

  " It seemed like the hotels could not cope with one touring team in terms of faxes , telephone and general service . 

  Those things have to be good if you're going to hold a World Cup because there is going to be a huge influx of tourists " , said Farr-Jones . 

  " One Wallaby player waited 11 hours for one fax to be sent to Brisbane while another member of the Wallaby team was unable to raise the international operator at 3.00am for a collect telephone call " . 

  Doyle supported Farr-Jones' comments and blamed South Africa's international isolation for their problems . 

  " They've got great stadiums , good rugby organisations and very astute administrators from both a corporate and organisations point of view . 

  But they still have a lot to learn in terms of communications , hotels , airports , the movement of people and the sensitivity to visiting teams " , he said . 

  Unlike Farr-Jones and Doyle , Meagher was at the coal face of the tourism problems as he led a group of 48 Australian supporters who travelled throughout South Africa during the tour . 

  " In my opinion they cannot stage the 1995 World Cup . 

  It's too quick , too close for them to get their house in order from the tourists " point of view . 

  " They need more time to get that industry into shape . 

  They're clearly not used to a lot of tourism . 

  And if we had problems , imagine the difficulties if 20,000 supporters arrive for the World Cup " , he added . 

  Meagher expressed his concerns to RWC chairman Russ Thomas during a meeting prior to the Ellis Park test between South Africa and the All Blacks . 

  Thomas asked Meagher to send him a written report . 

  Reinstated from league 

  FORMER Wallaby fly-half Tony Melrose has been reinstated to play rugby in Sydney next season after playing 10 seasons of rugby league with four different New South Wales rugby league premiership clubs . 

  Melrose was granted permission to return to play the amateur code by the New South Wales Rugby Union after an eight-month dispute where Melrose threatened to take legal action . 

  The NSWRU reinstated Melrose under regulation 7.5 which allows a union to re-admit a player under " special circumstances . " 

  NSWRU executive director Gary Pearse said Melrose's special circumstance was his " substantial contribution " to coaching since retiring from rugby league . 

  The NSWRU's decision seems certain to lead to the Australian Rugby Football Union's support of New Zealand Rugby Football Union's second application to the International Rugby Football Board for a new interpretation on reinstatement and admissions to the game . 

  Melrose was captain of the famous 1977-78 Australian Schoolboys team which travelled the United Kingdom , Ireland , Europe and Japan undefeated . 

  This team produced 10 Wallaby players , including the Ella brothers and dual rugby international Michael O'Connor plus former Australian rugby league captain , Wally Lewis . 

  Melrose played six tests up to 1979 after making a magnificent debut when the 1978 Wallabies trounced the All Blacks by a record 30-16 margin in the Third Test at Auckland's Eden Park . 

  He switched to league after the 1979 Wallaby tour to Argentina . 

  During his rugby league career Melrose played for Parramatta , Manly-Warringah , Eastern Suburbs and South Sydney and reached NSW honours at a representative level . 

  He retired from rugby league in 1989 and was reinstated to coach Parramatta rugby union reserve grade in 1991 before taking over as first grade coach this year . 

  Melrose comes from a strong rugby family with his elder brother Gregg a member of past Parramatta premiership winning teams while younger brother Brian has been a regular first-grade player with both Parramatta and Western Suburbs . 

  All are back with Parramatta and their father Les has been first grade manager . 

  The Melrose saga began earlier this year when he was one of several players , including former Wallaby Mitchell Cox , who applied for reinstatement to play the game . 

  Melrose was given a verbal assurance by a senior NSWRU official that his application would be approved . 

  However , all applications were refused . 

  But Melrose was adamant he wanted to return to union ranks . 

  He sought legal opinion and then stepped up his fight . 

  He claimed players applying for reinstatement should not be prejudiced by the amount of money they received from rugby league . 

  He believes that the intention to play professionally is " crime " . 

  The ARFU then stepped in to take over all applications regarding admissions and reinstatement . 

  When Melrose was asked to fill in a further application he refused to do so saying all the relevant information had been sent to NSWRU . 

  The NSWRU's decision is sure to lead to a host of new applications . 

  Former Wallaby scrum-half Brad Burke is certain to step up his campaign to be readmitted after a brief stint with Eastern Suburbs . 

  Director steps down 

  NSWRU executive director Gary Pearse will resign from his post at the end of October . 

  Pearse , the former Wallaby flanker , intends to establish his own sports marketing company and the NSWRU is set to be his first client . 

  No announcement has been made as to his replacement . 

  Lending a helping hand . 

  Wallaby fly-half Michael Lynagh ships on the ball to a black boy during the impromptu visit to the Zwide township near Port Elizabeth . 

  NEW ZEALAND 

  A YEN FOR THE RISING SUN 

  Five top players shocked their province by upping sticks and setting sail for Japan . 

  As DON CAMERON reports , they are unlikely to be the last New Zealanders to make the move . 

  There has been quite a staggering traffic of internationals into and out of New Zealand and provincial teams in recent years -- and now a highway has been invitingly posted . 

  Japan has long featured in New Zealand rugby , but in a rather detached way . 

  Then the contact became closer as Japanese national and club sides zeroed in on New Zealand as a convenient training area . 

  Along the way Mark Finlay , briefly an All Black fullback , and Marty Brooke , on the fringe of joining his two brothers in All Black colours , were attracted to Japan on working/ coaching assignments . 

  At the same time there was a steady stream of All Black or representative players trekking to and from Italy and France . 

  But now Japan is becoming a favoured target . 

  In the space of a week no fewer than five North Harbour players of various stature announced they were leaving for substantial playing-working contracts in Japan , ranging from two to three years . 

  The most prominent of these was Kevin Schuler , an All Black replacement in Wales and Ireland in 1989 , a captain in the second-tier divisional side in 1991 and an All Black in Australia this year . 

  Schuler went to Australia as a junior loose forward but , as the injury toll rose and his form improved , he won his first cap in the Second Test against Australia at Brisbane . 

  Sadly , he suffered a severe knee injury in that test , and was sent home along with Mike Brewer and Paul Henderson , who both suffered similar fates . 

  Schuler had earlier had an approach from a Japan steel company and , as he waited for his knee to heal , he wondered about his future . 

  He had had a series of injuries , he did not have reasonable employment , and a plainly lucrative offer from Japan had appeal . 

  So Schuler accepted it , knowing that by the end of it his prospects of regaining an All Black place might have disappeared . 

  Laurie Mains , the All Black coach , was plainly displeased at Schuler's decision , for it came about the time that Mains was hoping rugby league scouts might not be chasing his All Blacks in the next few months . 

  At the same time as Schuler made his decision Scott Pierce , a regular member of the New Zealand sevens side and a long-service North Harbour man , also said he was heading for Japan . 

  Pierce took the logical view that he did not expect the All Black selectors to be interested in him again . 

  Besides , he rather liked the idea of a well-paid break in Japan . 

  Within a week three other North Harbour players were heading for Japan , making five from that union . 

  One was Paul McGahan , a senior North Harbour player and a former All Black halfback who played on the tours of France and Argentina . 

  McGahan had an All Black trial this year , but slipped out of the reckoning . 

  The recurrence of a niggling pelvic injury -- plus difficulty in gaining consistent employment -- turned McGahan toward the Rising Sun . 

  The other two players were both club men , Glenn Brill , a Silverdale forward with a brief North Harbour record , and Nigel Ward , a high-scoring loose forward with Silverdale and then Northcote in recent times , but with no real chance of becoming a regular North Harbour player . 

  In passing North Harbour continue to be prominent in the to-ing and fro-ing of leading players . 

  Frank Bunce and Eric Rush , Auckland-bred but unable to command a regular place in the Auckland side , changed to North Harbour last season and gained a jumping off place into the All Blacks this year . 

  Even during the All Black tour of South Africa Ant Strachan , the surprise-packet of an All Black halfback this year , realised he was not likely to displace Jason Hewett , the World Cup no.2 halfback who has since been rejected by Mains and his selectors , from the Auckland position . 

  So Strachan in mid-tour signed up for the East Coast Bays club and the North Harbour seniors in a bid to get consistent first class play . 

  Strachan did not make the change immediately , for he crocked a shoulder in the test against South Africa and had a three-week stand-down period immediately after he returned from tour . 

  The passing parade of international players means that even with the loss of McGahan , North Harbour can still call on three international halfbacks : Strachan , Matthew Vaea and Tu Nu'auli'itia -- the latter two Western Samoan World Cup halfbacks who moved to North Harbour clubs last winter . 

  Nu'uali'itia came by way of the Counties senior side . 

  A North Harbour backline these days can start with Nu'ual'itia ( or Vaea ) at halfback , Ian Calder ( by way of Otago , New Zealand Colts , Wellington and Hong Kong ) at fly-half , Bunce at centre , Timo Tagaloa ( formerly Wellington and Western Samoa ) on one wing , Rush on the other , and home-grown Warren Burton at fullback . 

  In contrast North Harbour can field a pack completely comprising locally produced players , with Apollo Perelini , the Western Samoan loose forward , as the only outside candidate . 

  Auckland's incredible run as holder of the Ranfurly Shield goes on and on . 

  At the time of writing Auckland have won an away challenge against Marlborough 55-3 and then beaten Otago 21-16 at Eden Park . 

  This win stretched Auckland's record to 50 consecutive defences of the shield since winning it in 1985 . 

  At that stage Canterbury had just equalled the old defence record of 25 , set by Auckland in 1960-63 . 

  Otago made a brave challenge , led by Mike Brewer in his first appearance since a series of injuries took him out of the All Black tour of Australia . 

  Afterwards Brewer said he could see Auckland holding the shield for as long as they could keep together their very strong scrum of Olo Brown , Sean Fitzpatrick , Steve McDowell , Michael Jones , Gary Whetton , Robin Brooke , Mark Carter and Zinzan Brooke -- All Blacks all . 

  However , Grant Fox showed he is not always the infallible points-scorer and shield holder . 

  He succeeded with only two of then attempts from a slushy field against Otago . 

  Otago will soon be without Mike Brewer -- he has accepted work with the Canterbury sports wear company and will be based in future in Christchurch . 

  Brewer hopes to finish the season with Otago , but is uncertain about his playing future in Canterbury . 

  Surrogate Samurai . 

  New Zealander Chris O'Neill was the first Kiwi to sport the red and white of Japan when he played at the 1990 Hong Kong Sevens -- but he almost certainly will not be the last . 

  SOUTH AFRICA 

  BEDFORD'S BLAST 

  Former Springbok skipper TOMMY BEDFORD's exclusive column -- only in Rugby World &amp;amp; Post 

  This column argues the South African officials have been helping to professionalise the game by creating elite city clubs which cream off the best resources at the expense of the poorer , less fashionable sides . 

  Judging by the number of recent articles , letters to newspapers and magazines and general comment on the future of the game , it is the controversy over professionalism which has rightly become the item for debate . 

  Even Nigel Starmer-Smith concluded his editorial piece last month of the inevitability of the acceptance of professionalism , with a " hopefully , though , we will find that the game will not suffer as much as we fear " . 

  I fear though you are hopelessly optimistic , Nigel . 

  I have in my own way tried to point out that , of the world's leading rugby nations , the game in south Africa has suffered badly not only as a result of its years of isolation -- as many of those who have just visited the country during the New Zealand and Australian tours believe -- but precisely because our officials have for a very long time been at the forefront of the trend towards professionalism . 

  And , as it is also obvious that this tendency is becoming a worldwide one , it means that the game will in due course suffer everywhere as it has suffered in South Africa . 

  Thirty or forty years ago , when South African players across a very broad spectrum were renowned for their prowess and professionalism on the field of play , things were very different . 

  In those days the game was played amongst the 15 provincial unions which constituted the former SARB in a spirit inspired by the International Board . 

  This spirit was truly possible because the provincial unions were a composite blend of town and country , founded on a basic pyramid structure of after-school games for schoolboys , healthy competitive rugby at club level most Saturday afternoons all winter long for the mass of players . 

  Occasionally -- maybe eight or ten times a season on the remaining Saturdays -- there were first class fixtures for select fifteens representing the unions in the Currie Cup competition . 

  It was this fundamentally sound structure which made the game readily accessible to everyone in those unions and led to the South African game being so strong , so great , and so famous . 

  That was because it enabled the whole rugby fraternity to participate , with financial reward being the last thing on anyone's mind . 

  Amateurs all , this also meant that the Springboks were chosen from dorps in the Boland and the Border as well as from the cities of the Transvaal and Northern Transvaal . 

  In the last 30 years , and long before the amalgamation in March of the white and black and brown rugby factions , the unions were gradually split and sub-divided until now they number perhaps 26. of these , 20 are rural , including Boland and Border , and have been weakened to a point where they are virtually powerless , impoverished , dying or dead . 

  There will be no kiss of life to resuscitate them either . 

  For today it is the other six elite urban " test match " unions who have been engineered to dominate South African rugby . 

  All the action is with them now , and they have all the money . 

  They have the money because they have the glamour , and because they have the glamour they have the television , the media , the sponsorship , the grand stadia , the lush accoutrements for officials and plush hospitality boxes for the favoured -- and yet more glamour . 

  This is where the players are attracted , and this is where they are offered their perks because this is where it can be afforded . 

  This is why Springboks these days come from only these six unions , as we saw in the recent internationals . 

  South African rugby has really come to this : a game for 90 players from the Transvaal , Northern Transvaal , Western Province , Eastern Province , Orange Free State and Natal who get wonderfully reimbursed for the expense of now playing 23 or more first-class fixtures in a season against one another while the rest hardly get a look in . 

  And this is why , in spite of the years of ostracism , it was possible for the Springboks to lose by only three points to the All Blacks and 23 points to the Wallabies . 

  As for the poor old majority of ordinary rugger buggers playing at club level ( roughly 40,000 of them ) , well they have just bee forgotten , relegated as they are , especially in the " test match " unions , to timetables dictated by the 90 and playing any days but Saturdays . 

  Club rugby , through this wealthy , first-class " tail " wagging the club " dog " , has been decimated , as has the system which once had 15 viable unions catering for all players at all levels in a rather rough and amateurism but entirely wholesome -- and ultimately highly successful and fairer -- why . 

  It is surely this trend in South Africa which must be resisted by those who love rugby around the world . 

  Now that isolation is over South Africa's unwholesome pre-eminence in making money and fame out of the game for a few over-exposed players ( at the expense of enjoyment of the game for the many ) could be infectious . 

  The IB is already hastening down this path . 

  Its officials today orchestrate an annual plethora of money-spinning international tours of such proportions that it would be unreasonable for players fulfilling these official commitments at this level not to be compensated financially . 

  The lesson which can be learnt from South Africa regarding professionalism then seems to be that , as I pointed out last month , there is a contradiction in allowing a mercenary spirit to dominate an amateur game . 

  Thus , surely there should not be more prestige matches played by fewer paid combatants in front of passive and hospitality-packaged crowds , but more active support for the playing of the game by as many players as possible at as many levels as possible . 

  FRANCE 

  PENAUD LOOKS THE PART 

  The Argentine tour has left French coach PIERRE BERBIZIER with a battle hardened squad as he told CHRIS THAU 

  During the last week of August , the French started their buildup to the Springbok series . 

  Twenty-seven veterans of the summer campaign to Argentina ( minus centre Christian Coeurville who is involved in exams ) , along with the " tired trio " -- Sella , Mesnel and LaFond -- and the " banned trio " of Gimbert , Benazzi and Roumat , and Sebastian Conchy ( the Begles and French students flanker ) met for a squad session in Leon in South West France . 

  Coach Pierre Berbizier and assistant Christophe Mombet , who both flew over to follow the fortunes of the Springboks in South Africa , rejoined their players for a light training session and a day of fitness tests . 

  The message to the players is " beware " . 

  Do not be deceived by the result against Australia . 

  The Springboks are among the best in the world " , Berbizier warned . 

  The South Africans lacked a yardstick . 

  They confronted the best in the world without knowing exactly what to expect . 

  That was obvious from their performance . 

  They were surprised by the intensity of the response , their rhythm suffered and their perception of the space-time rapport is not of the highest calibre . 

  But there is nothing wrong with their set-piece department , and their overall ability to play out wide . 

  Instinctively , they are good players ; what they need is exposure to international matches . 

  After that they will be a threat to anyone . 

  " Their predicament was emphasized by the problems experienced by their captain , Naas Botha , who never managed to bring his forwards into the game . 

  With a back row which was very strong and relatively heavy , the South African forwards struggled to stay in the game . 

  Besides , Botha does not defend , which is not really a problem because he stayed miles from his scrum-half , Du Preez , and made him look terrible with a slippery ball . 

  " But he is a good player , though . 

  He has a great vision of the game , and can play stunning rugby -- just as he did in the test against New Zealand when some of his tactical options were simply excellent . 

  " We will be ready to receive them at the beginning of October . 

  The backbone of France is naturally the squad that toured Argentina . 

  Overall it was a good tour and several players grew both in stature and confidence . 

  The side has also welded together emotionally and some of the players who went to Argentina have a great future in the game . 

  " Take Penaud , for example . 

  His position as fly-half requires not only skill and vision , but also confidence and experience . 

  While technically he is a very accomplished player , we had to build up both his confidence and experience . 

  Initially , therefore , he was encouraged to play his individual game , to look after himself and not be obsessed with the players around him . 

  We knew that because of his inexperience his reading of the game was not his strongest asset . 

  As his confidence grew we carefully started to build a player able to play for the others . 

  " I think he is now a far better player than the youngster we threw in at the deep end against Wales last season . 

  You do not start with 20-year-olds by asking them to be a service to the collective . 

  That comes with age , experience and confidence . 

  Alain Penaud -- encouraged to play his own individual game . 

  " There are several players around who have gone thorough the same type of metamorphosis . 

  Christophe Deylaud has been encouraged to express himself and he is improving in heaps and bounds . 

  Aubin Hueber has already made the jump . 

  He is already playing for the team and has the qualities to perhaps captain France on day . 

  Sadourny emerged as a remarkably confident player , but the challenge from Ougier is very strong . 

  It is a pleasure for the coach to have two players as good as they are challenging for positions . 

  " As I said before we left for Argentina , Sella , Mesnel and Lafond were welcomed back to the squad . 

  They have shown tremendous enthusiasm and a great appetite for work . 

  That's been very pleasing and offers me very attractive playing options . 

  " Those suspended before the trip to Argentina have also been reintegrated -- Benazzi , Roumat and Gimbert -- while Mougeot will join the others when he gets fit . 

  Lascube has served his suspension , as did Moscato , but the latter will have to show that his discipline has improved before he is to be considered for selection again . 

  " The tour will also allow us to see other players in action . 

  South Africa start their tour with the game against the " Espoirs " in Bordeaux which , to us , is a very important game . 

  The Espoirs are the French Second XV , mainly for the younger players not yet ready for full cap games . 

  " The Espoirs went to Zimbabwe this summer , and I understand that several of them had an outstanding tour . 

  We want to see them in action against South Africa . 

  Thirteen players from last year's Espoirs are now in the French squad , which tells you how significant this side to our development plans " . 

  ARGENTINA 

  Pumas sent to slaughter 

  The two tests defeats by an understrength France in Buenos Aires brought the series of test defeats for Argentina to 10 since they beat the touring England team 15-13 on August 4 last year . 

  This led to the usual talk of dismissing coach Luis Gradin , the man in charge throughout this period of successive defeats , but he will stay on at least until the end of the year when the present Argentine RU committee changes . 

  There was also renewed discussion , however , about bringing in a foreign coach , preferably from New Zealand , to work alongside Gradin to prepare the team for matches against Spain in Buenos Aires at the end of September and the Pumas tour to Spain , France and Romania starting mid-October . 

  There were also calls for the selection committee to comply with a ruling which says that no player out of his own club's first team should be picked for the Pumas . 

  This was chiefly aimed at Pumas captain Pablo Garreton who , since moving from his native Tucuman to Buenos Aires for work purposes , has been wallowing in the Belgrano club's lower teams . 

  Garreton received a lot of the stick for the defeats against France and his Pumas days seem to be numbered , if not finished , especially after he told the French press that he would be playing in that country next season . 

  Long-serving Argentine RU president Carlos Tozzi is truly worried . 

  One of his immediate suggestions is to form a committee composed of all previous Pumas coaches to find solutions , but this is unpopular even among the coaches themselves . 

  At least one of them , Hector " Pochola " Silva ( who currently trains the Buenos Aires selection ) , has openly refused to form part of such a committee and thinks all the others should do likewise . 

  " The Pumas " critics should not be so dramatic . 

  We have to admit that it's a question of generations . 

  We have not got such good players as in the past and those we have now should be motivated as much as possible " , he said . 

  Former Puma star , Marcelo Loffreda , thinks that " Our rugby as a whole has deteriorated due to the way it has been managed by our officials and this crisis has made itself felt in the Pumas in the last two years . 

  Gradin is the reflection of what has happened to all of us . 

  We have not learnt from mistakes . 

  It looks as if we like bashing our heads against a wall . 

  " Experience tells us that a team has to have a balance of young and experienced older players . 

  But again they picked a team of boys , as they did in the last two World Cups . 

  A youngster , with 14 other youngsters as team-mates , is just being sent to the slaughter . 

  This was specially obvious in the Second Test against France when the boys had nothing left . 

  The worst thing is that officials and coaches are not willing to listen to other opinions . 

  " The players are not to blame " , he continued . 

  " They are not clear on their objectives and are not given the technical tools to use on the field so that they can not play to their potential . 

  But for that to happen players of experience and a leader on the field -- missing against France -- are also vital . 

  The whole emphasis of our rugby must be changed and , if that means changing people , it should be done . 

  " Officials must concentrate on popularising and organising the game and not on personal relations and politics to stay in power . 

  There are too many people among them who think they know it all " . 

  Jose Maria Santamarina , a current Puma , does not quite agree : " We cannot deny we have failed . 

  The results show that . 

  But this teams needs more continuity than up to now and it can still do a lot better . 

  We must only overcome our immaturity and , within a short time , the results will improve . 

  Mistakes were made , but correct them it is not necessary to change the general structure . 

  I think the same players and coaches should go on this year's European tour . 

  " They say we lacked courage " , said Santamarina , " and the traditional fighting spirit of the Pumas . 

  But they ( the French ) did not beat us physically but because we lost our cool ... and there were worse problems , especially the lack of a leader . 

  Before we had ( Hugo ) Porta who was ideal -- but he is not there any more and the whole of Argentine rugby is suffering a crisis . 

  For the last few years it was held up by 20 players of outstanding international standard and we did not realise that technically we were dying " . 

  Former Puma tighthead Serafin Dengra , now playing in France , adds : " The Argentine RU is to blame for the present low standards . 

  They insist on continuing with an old structure ( that on amateurism ) which no longer exists anywhere else in the world . 

  To compete at top international level one must comply with certain basic concepts , such as training for four months before a test series . 

  But this is not done . 

  We want to stay at the top level while doing the same things we did 40 years ago . 

  It is absolutely necessary to allow sponsors into the game . 

  The Argentine RU seems to be the only one which can allow itself the luxury of having half a team of top internationals watching the game " . 

  Serafin Dengra , the former Puma tighthead prop , now plying his trade in Italy , blames the Argentine RU for the losing streak . 

  He was referring to Argentine players with clubs abroad who , according to local laws , can not play for the Pumas . 

  And he also insisted that the crisis is to deep that there have to be important changes at the top within the union : " There must be less politics , more work ... 

  I think the officials themselves must realise that changes are necessary " . 

  The problem now is that the leading countries will not be so keen to invite Argentina to tour , although they may continue to like coming to Argentina . 

  France wanted to cancel Argentina's tour this year , eventually compromising by reducing it to three matches only because the Argentine RU said " If we cannot come to France , you cannot come here " . 

  CANADA 

  BRUTAL SCHEDULE 

  PETER McMULLAN describes a hectic round of pre-Wembley warm-up games for the Canucks ... 

  Vancouver lawyer Rod Holloway , who doubles as coach of British Columbia and assistant coach to Canada's national squad , warned his players in mid-July they were embarking on what was certain to be a " brutal " schedule . 

  First came a 7,000 mile , six day round trip from ocean to ocean for Rugby Canada's two games in Newfoundland ; then back to the west coast with all the healthy B. C. players involved in one or more of the eight games undertaken against Swansea and Northumberland . 

  While not every top player was able to travel to Newfoundland , Rugby Canada still mustered a powerful squad that included 10 internationals , eight of them World Cuppers . 

  The first game with legs still weary , was won 31-14 over a young and energetic Newfoundland XV . 

  Second time around was more impressive with the Swilers overwhelmed 61-7 as outside-half Gareth Rees provided four tries and eight conversions before returning for a second season of club rugby in France . 

  With both Holloway and national coach Ian Birtwell looking ahead to the England v Canada international at Wembley on October 17 it was natural to hope for a good start to the new season against incoming U. K. tourists . 

  Instead it was the visitors who made the early running , albeit by the narrowest of margins in the first three games . 

  Swansea went home unbeaten , starting with a 40-14 win over Alberta before accounting for a B. C. President's XV 18-17 and British Columbia 18-16 . 

  They it was Northumberland's turn with victories against Edmonton ( 46-14 ) , Alberta ( 13-11 ) and the B. C. President's XV ( 17-15 ) . 

  Canada captain and lock Norm Hadley missed both Swansea games with a neck muscle strain while wing Pat Palmer , also with neck problems , and fullback Scott Stewart ( twisted knee ) were casualties from the President's XV clash with the Welsh League champions in Victoria . 

  That certainly made a difference three days later when British Columbia faced the tourists at Vancouver's Brockton , a stunning setting on a perfect summer afternoon . 

  Recalling the turbulent 21-21 Centenary draw between B. C. and Wales " B " in 1989 , one of the best crowds in years was on hand to see Swansea , workmanlike and without doubt the fitter of the two teams , win by two points with a goal , a try and two penalties to a goal , a drop goal and two penalties . 

  In Victoria mid-week , the President's XV , with Graf kicking three of his four penalties , had moved into a 14-3 lead before two errors , a missed tackle mid-field and then a missed touch kick allowed Swansea to turn the tide with tries by wing Simon Davies and centre Scott Gibbs . 

  Gibbs and fullback Tony Clement were full of running at all times and , while B. C. led again 17-15 with another Graf penalty , Swansea were ultimate winners as outside-half Stephen Jones added a second winning penalty to his earlier conversion of Gibb's score . 

  Jones also made the try with a perfect chip through from a five metre scrum . 

  It could have been a big day for B. C.'s new president , Vancouver businessman Chuck Plester , but Graf was inches wide with another penalty in injury time . 

  Northumberland had their outside-half Ian Chandler to thank for the late drop goal that led to a 13-11 victory over Alberta on a day when a freak Arctic airflow brought snow and near freezing temperatures to Calgary . 

  Kicking was also decisive for the Northerners when they faced the B. C. President's XV in Victoria , winning 17-15 with a last minute try by wing Simon Johnston after four penalties by fullback Nick Robinson had nullified the goal and a try scored by their opponents . 

  The tide finally turned in favour of the hosts when Vancouver-Fraser Valley , with former Canada scrum-half Ian Stuart and World Cup no.8 Glenn Ennis the only capped players in view , defeated Northumberland 18-14 in another game that did not live up to expectations . 

  Northumberland found the strength of British Columbia rather more than they could handle in their final game at Langley , a community on the outskirts of Vancouver . 

  John Graf , whose form at outside-half has been a highlight , captained B. C. In the continuing absence of Norm Hadley and proceeded to score 23 points in a 38-10 result . 

  In Eastern Canada , Scottish first division tourists Jed-Forest quickly found rugby in Ontario is not to be taken lightly . 

  They lost to Eastern Ontario 35-8 , tied Toronto Scottish 11-11 , lost again to Balmy Beach 25-8 and then were crushed 57-3 by the Ontario XV that had earlier dispatched Heriot's 33-0 . 

  LEAGUE OF INTERNATIONAL MARKSMEN 

  Compiled by Peter Jackson 

  The World's Best 

  TOP SCORERS 

  If he never kicks another goal for England SIMON HODGKINSON will have the consolation of knowing that nothing , least of all ball-doctoring , can damage his figures . 

  They represent the highest points average in the international game -- a fraction above the All Black whom he deposed from no.1 . 

  Hodgkinson's World Cup role may have been depressingly brief and , if it was far from what he wanted , the way the tournament worked out did ensure his arrival at the top of the world kicker's table . 

  It was not just that Nottingham's studious fullback landed seven goals from his solitary World Cup appearance , against the American Eagles at Twickenham last October . 

  The event coincided with New Zealand on the wane and Grant Fox paying the inevitable penalty . 

  Despite his subsequent recovery to something like his old form , Fox has not quite been able to stop the shrinking process . 

  A few ricochets have made all the difference . 

  Had he kicked three more penalties during the Bledisloe Cup series instead of watching them rebound off the posts or miss by a whisker , Fox's average would have been identical to Hodgkinson's twenty-eight points from his last two matches amounts to ample proof that he has made a complete recovery from the doldrums of Dublin last October when he spoke of retirement in the immediate aftermath of the All Blacks losing their titles . 

  Michael Lynagh is still rattling along towards the four-figure mark but not at the same rate . 

  In six tests for the Wallabies since the World Cup final his success ratio has dipped below 50 per cent . 

  Every goalkicker hits a periodic trough and more than once over the last 12 months " Noddy " has been within one unsuccessful kick of handing over to the New South Wales fullback Marty Roebuck . 

  Against Wales at Cardiff , for instance , he was on the point of giving up . 

  At each crisis point Lynagh has always kicked the goal , invariably from a difficult range or awkward angle , and dropped back into the groove . 

  He is , of course , much more than the most prodigious goalkicker the international game has seen or is likely to see , given the reduction in the number of penalty offences . 

  A more rounded performer than Fox , Lynagh is the best fly-half in the world . 

  At the rate the Wallabies play test rugby , he may not take much more than another two years to reach the thousand . 

  He will by only 31 come the next World Cup . 

  Unlike Hodgkinson , Lynagh and Fox have sustained their consistency over an infinitely longer period . 

  What Hodgkinson achieved in English terms was to elevate goalkicking to an art form with the metronomic rhythm of his swing and the low trajectory , more often than not just enough to get the ball over the bar . 

  The table is nothing more than a rough guide , not an order of merit . 

  What it does not show is the most revealing statistic of all , the percentage of goals kicked by each player from his total attempts and the degree of difficulty involved . 

  Such information , alas , is not available . 

  If it were , I have a hunch that Fox would come out on top . 

  The fastest kicked to 100 , 200 , 300 , 400 , and 500 points , his technique , composure and accuracy , especially from within a 35-yard radius , have made a matchwinner par excellence . 

  If I had to choose one man to kick a 40-yard penalty from close to the touchline to rescue The Earth from being knocked out of the Inter-Galactic Cup in the last minute , Grant Fox would be the man ... 

  Simon Hodgkinson -- metronomic form . 

  Grant Fox -- selected for The Earth as the kicker in the Inter-Galactic Cup . 

  Michael Lynagh -- below his best , but hits the mark on crisis point . 

  YOUTH 

  Mike Stevenson reports 

  SCHOOLS 

  The World Schools' Rugby Championship at Whakatans ( New Zealand ) was won by the THE NEW PLYMOUTH BOYS HS ( NZ ) , who beat Avele College from Western Samoa by 16-8 . 

  The two English entrants , Bradford G. S . and Mount St. Marys , could not overcome the handicap of lack of preparation , as the tournament was 12 weeks out of the English season . 

  The summer term , as the major exam period , was not conducive to the correct preparation . 

  Nevertheless the experience was tremendous and Geoff Wappett , the Bradford coach , was high in his praise for the organisation of the tournament and the benefit that his young wide received from it . 

  The new laws were generally well received but Bradford found the stamping and use of the boot intolerable . 

  Consequently the injury list was formidable . 

  They lost their scrum-half , Adam Brosnan , after three minutes of the first match and their captain , Jonathan Ions , with a broken jaw in the second match plus four more serious injuries and a host of minor injuries . 

  Geoff Wappett writes : " A great deal was learned by everyone and , should the opportunity occur again , I would recommend that we make the trip again . 

  The intensity and directness of Southern Hemisphere rugby is emphatic and the game is considerably more physical in attack and defence than our game . 

  The players , 21 from 28 of whom will be back for the coming season , will be the better for their teething experience " . 

  RUGBY SCHOOL's ambitious Antipodean tour took them from the birthplace of the game in England to Nelson , where the first game of rugby was played in New Zealand between the Nelson club and Nelson College in 1870 . 

  The tour entailed well over 50 hours of air travel , a temperature range of nine degrees to 33 degrees C and 17 beds in 55 nights ! 

  After a day on the Great Barrier Reef enjoying the white water rafting , the serious rugby commenced . 

  The first game was notable in that , apart from a demanding first win , Sebastian Sloane became the first Rugby schoolboy to score a five point try . 

  The defeated side was Cairns and District Juniors and one of the four girls in the crowd was heard to suggest : " Let us cheer for the poms , you guys " ! 

  The other match in Australia was also won and the finale of the Bledisloe Cup ( 26-23 to New Zealand ) watched , before departure for New Zealand . 

  There three defeats and two wins was far from chastening and the final match , against Ratu Kadavulava School in Churchill Park ( Fiji ) , in front of 5000 spectators , was an unforgettable experience . 

  Rugby lead 16-10 with less than a minute to go but a try under the posts brought a defeat by 17-16 that in David Ray's words " ... did not seem to matter " . 

  As master-in-charge of rugby , David Ray writes : " In hindsight we took too many players . 

  With a squad of 22 to 24 , we would probably have won six and lost one and drawn one of our eight matches . 

  Our injury count was remarkably low . 

  Only the Christ's pack and the Auckland backs had a real edge on us , though we went backwards in every scrum . 

  New Zealanders really do scrummage and referees take a liberal view of the metre and a half law . 

  " We did surprisingly well in rucks and mauls and , as expected in New Zealand , most players went to ground and looked for rucked ball . 

  Schoolboys play with more aggression and pace than in Britain . 

  Minimum stoppages are the order of the day " . 

  " British touring sides have a choice . 

  Either tour young and hope to survive , then look to a successful home season or tour old and plan to win at least half your games . 

  We faced enough hakas to last a lifetime ! 

  It was unforgettable experience " . 

  THE LEYS , who have been a considerable force in schools' rugby in recent years , prospered on the Austrian tour to earn five wins and a couple of defeats from seven games . 

  Their " B " team , who also toured , won three matches and lost four . 

  Like Bradford and Rugby they encountered difficulties with the new Laws , especially those governing the ruck . 

  The only heavy defeat was at Newington , who were playing their ninth match in six weeks , as opposed to the tourists , who were commencing their season . 

  Master-in-charge , Austin Jessop , was quick to stress the excellence of the Newington side and to suggest that they would almost certainly have won either at the end of the tour or into a domestic season . 

  The half-backs , James Pinnington ( scrum-half ) and his partner Matthew Coe were , as they were last season , most impressive and the excellence of the pack augurs well for the coming winter . 

  Austin Jessop is appreciating the luxury of virtually being able to name his 1st XV before the school has played a single match . 

  They will be captained by their talented flanker , Bramall . 

  Like the other tourists , the hospitality and " extra-curricular " side of the tour was an outstanding success . 

  RYDAL toured Zimbabwe and , following some problems in recent years , feel , despite defeat in all five matches , that they have laid the foundations for a more successful season . 

  Rydal were desperately unlucky to lost the services of their capable centre and captain , Charles Evans , who was injured , having scored twice , in the opening match . 

  Sandle Manor Prep School line up after winning the Boundary Oak School seven-a-side tournament . 

  The school had its best ever season last year , winning all 12 games played while scoring 312 points and conceding 52 . 

  Harry Townsend reports 

  COLTS 

  Colts County Champions Lancashire celebrated their share in a unique treble when the Lancashire RFU held a dinner at Old Trafford to celebrate their senior team winning the Senior County Championship , their U21s sharing the U21 title with Surrey and the colts retaining the national colts title . 

  County sponsors Bass ( Senior and U21 ) and the trio of British Nuclear Fuels , Thistle Hotels and Morton International ( colts ) were guests of the Lancashire RFU with RFU President Danie Serfontein and Lancashire Past President Eddie Deacey proposing and replying to the principal toast . 

  Lancashire Colts begin their defence of the title with their traditional match against Warwickshire , whilst defeated finalists Middlesex , with only Matt Saunders and Andy Turner ( both Staines ) and Luke Snowdon ( Ruislip ) still eligible , commence an intensive programme with fixtures against Buckinghamshire ( September 27th ) and North Midlands ( October 4th ) before entertaining Germany Youth under floodlights at Staines on Wednesday October 7th . 

  A weekend tour to Scotland ten days later leads in the County Championship season , all indicative of the care devoted by counties to finding , grooming and coaching talented young players . 

  Surrey are holding an U17 Festival at Old Emmanuel on September 20th , with their four area teams taking part in a 20 minutes each way mini tournament and coaching day . 

  Moves to organise an U17 County competition within the London Group were not unanimously supported ; but the four counties south of the Thames ( Surrey , Sussex , Kent and Hampshire ) intend to play informally as part of a progression towards colts county rugby . 

  Happily attempts are being made to change the colts qualifying date to September 1st from 1993 onwards rather than the anomalous January 1st which has for years disrupted team building by splitting units established over the years on the September date . 

  This could be the necessary catalyst to establish a full U17 County programme . 

  Fourth Division TOWCESTRIANS with an outstanding 1991/ 92 season in which they won the East Midlands Colts Cup and won 28 of 30 matches , are planning an even more successful campaign , but few clubs could have enjoyed a better pre-season build up than COLCHESTER . 

  Their U16 and U18 teams , supplemented with players from Cambridge , Braintree and Bury , each enjoyed seven and six match tours respectively to Sweden under coach Kevin Dunne and culminating in victories over Sweden at U16 ( 19-3 ) and U18 ( 16-3 ) levels . 

  Only Vandelsborg ( 7-4 ) and Sodertalje ( 11-0 ) , both at U16 level , ran their visitors at all close . 

  The highlight of the THORNBURY JUNIOR section close season was a visit by Jeremy Guscott to present awards to some 120 young players : an event indicative of the high profile increasingly enjoyed by English rugby and English players . 

  The RFU are seizing the initiative with their Fifteen Days of England Rugby campaign between September 5th and 19th , which sets out to market the game among young players and their parents everywhere . 

  27 constituent bodies are taking the to the roads with their Roadshows , each sponsored by nationally known organisations and with the RFU itself picking up the tab in Leicestershire , Northumberland and Somerset . 

  BUCKINGHAMSHIRE , for instance , are taking their Roadshow throughout the country and also organising training camps at Aylesbury and Chinnor under Gary Pearce ; Buckinghamshire are going similarly with their training camps at Thatcham , Windsor and Reading led by Paul Rendall . 

  WORTHING in West Sussex are organising a fortnight of varied activities for all ages ; whilst in East Sussex , Hastings and Bexhill continue this impetus by holding an Open Day on September 20th sponsored by the Hastings Observer for youngsters aged from seven to 15 at the William Parker School where they hope to build a clubhouse and share club and school facilities . 

  HASTINGS U14s and U16s were runners-up in their Sussex Leagues , and with the local paper also sponsoring inter-school U12 and U13 seven-a-side tournaments later in the month which have attracted ten local schools , the integration of junior rugby within the senior club and community is apparent . 

  EXETER are holding a coaching clinic and fitness testing day for young ( 16 to 19 year old ) players on September 15th . 

  Cumbria have a wide ranging programme including the Pilkington Roadshow in October at Workington , Egremont , Kendal , Keswick and Kirkby Lonsdale whilst David Pears is helping out at Workington on September 2nd and Wade Dooley at Kendal on September 15th . 

  Notts , Lincs and Derbyshire are promoting the Thorntons Challenge with coaching equipment for clubs to be won , whilst Celinet are offering 15 prizes of coaching weeks in a Prize Draw . 

  All over England , clubs and sponsors are emulating and even surpassing such initiatives . 

  Yet perhaps the most imaginative and far reaching scheme is the cross-curricular project developed by RFU senior coach and polytechnic lecturer Tony Butlin in conjunction with Walbottle High School and supported by the RFU and the University of Sunderland . 

  This provides a stimulating learning experience at secondary school level in all the foundation subjects ; information packs were distributed to all schools during the summer and will provide a novel learning experience in a way that will grasp the imagination of young students countrywide . 

  The London Group and Thames Valley Club Junior Fixture Exchange handled more than 1,000 fixture requests last season in age groups from U13 to U19 and from clubs ranging from Bedford to Basingstoke , Wasps to Harlequins , Old Albanians to the Kent and Essex coasts . 

  Many a harassed fixture secretary has been helped at short notice over the past nine years ! 

  Ring or write to Harry Townsend and if you have information about your teams for inclusion in this column , then write only to me direct ! 

  U21 

  It is business as usual for ENGLAND U21s , although it is saddening to see Martin Turner , a wonderful servant of English ( particularly English junior ) rugby , retiring as chairman of the England U21 panel in favour of Malcom Phillips with John Elliott continuing as team manager . 

  Martin had happily seen U21 rugby fully established as third in line in the English rugby hierarchy , and he thoroughly deserved the presentation made to him during the Trent College week by the panel to mark the esteem in which he is universally held . 

  The U21 qualification date remains September 1st ( not the January 1st suggested last season ) , whilst although the 1992/ 3 season ends on May 1st with the now traditional match against the French Armed Forces at Twickenham as curtain raiser to the Pilkington Cup Final , it began with a match against Italy U21 s on September 5th as curtain raiser to the Leicester v England match which celebrates the centenary of rugby at Welford Rock . 

  Further opportunity follows for the squad established after the 1992 Divisional Championship when on Wednesday October 14th , four days after a heavy Courage League weekend , they entertain Ireland U21 s at Newcastle Gosforth . 

  Nine of the team selected against Italy , including new captain Richard Bramley ( Wakefield ) , had represented England U21's in the hard fought 21-21 draw in May against the French Armed Forces ; two more plus three bench reserves had played a day later in the sweeping 48-12 win against the Netherlands . 

  Sleighthome , Bramley , Bracken , Clarke , Crompton and Ravenscroft had already earned selection for the Student World Cup team in Italy , and to top it all the first three also enjoyed a trip to Namibia and Zimbabwe with the senior North Divisional team ! 

  Further motivation this season for student and U21 players is the possibility of a July 1993 seven match England U21 tour to Australia ; but with the U21 county and divisional matches , not to mention student representative matches and the demanding Courage League programme , to fit in to the normal season , it's hard work being earmarked as a rugby high flier . 

  Squad selection for the tour and the French Armed Forces fixture will be made following the 1993 U21 Divisional Championship , but most of the early season squad will still be available for a second year . 

  The virtually complete Student Five Nations Championship with fixtures played on the Friday preceding senior Five Nations matches , and the U21 Divisional Championship taking place on the Sundays following the last three Five Nations matches involving England , not only poses problems for players faced with selection for both , but also puts a great number of young players in the limelight as the Development Squad for the future is gradually moulded and refined . 

  Every country is doing its best to ensure that promising players are not missed ; and the first 15-a-side Exiles tournament between the Scots , Welsh and Irish takes place at Old Deer Park on November 7th and 8th with IRB referees Derek Bevan , Jim Fleming and Stephen Hilditch officiating . 

  The NORTH U21s , managed by Dave Parker , enjoyed their biennial pre-season tour to Marvejols in Central France where they were hosted for their week long visit by French families as the result of town twinning with Cockermouth , and the fantastic hospitality and often adventurous leisure activities were enjoyed not only by the players but also by referee Fred Howard , who officiated in the first two matches . 

  The North U21s defeated ASC Montferrand U21s 18-6 in their opening match , tries being scored by flanker Jonathan Griffiths ( Wakefield ) following a 60 yard break from a lineout by Darren McKinnon ( West Hartlepool ) and left wing Graham Campbell ( Egremont ) , the sole Cumbrian in the squad . 

  Tony Handley ( Waterloo ) kicked a conversion . 

  Two days later they drew 14-14 , after leading 14-7 at half-time in a strength sapping 90F , with Languedoc/ Roussillon Select U21 based on Bziers and Narbonne . 

  Tries were scored by Newcastle/ Gosforth and Newcastle University left wing Mark White , and flanker Simon Henry following a break by Loughborough University colleague Alistair Metcalfe . 

  Handley added both conversations . 

  The final match against the local Lozre Regional Select U21s was won comfortably 54-3 . 

  The North , led by Andy Morris , included fellow England U21s Dickon Edwards and Tony Handley ; whilst Sleightholme , Northey , Bramley and Bracken , the majority still eligible for U21 Divisional competition , were away in Zimbabwe and Namibia . 

  Clubs everywhere are realising the importance of U21 rugby in retaining promising players as a natural extension of colts , midi and mini rugby ; and COLCHESTER are the latest in this long line with a emphasis on university vacation periods with an U21 orientated 3rd XV in the interim . 

  Local hero . 

  England's Jeremy Guscott takes centre stage at an awards ceremony at Thornbury RFC , held for the Bristol club's thriving junior section . 

  PREFACE 

  If aggression and violence are part and parcel of what it means to be human , then why is it that there exist societies where aggressive or violent behaviour is conspicuous by its absence ? 

  It was with such questions in mind that , in 1985 , we invited a group of social anthropologists who had fieldwork experience in societies which , for whatever reason , they described as " peaceful " to attend an informal seminar to discuss the issues involved in interpreting such societies and how our " evidence " could be used to question established theories on human nature . 

  We also wished to explore the viability of holding a more formal conference devoted to the topic of peace as a mode of social behaviour . 

  It became evident that there was no shortage of topics , and we decided that a conference was indeed called for in which we could pursue our shared interest in peaceful societies and attempt to challenge what we all regarded as a biased approach which presented human behaviour in terms of how aggressive drives are handled . 

  Those giving papers were asked to emphasize humans as meaning-makers , rather than humans as biological primates , and to elucidate from their own ethnographic experience the indigenous meanings of concepts relevant for an understanding of human interpersonal and , wherever applicable , intersocietal relations . 

  The title of the Conference was " Peace , Action , and the Concept of Self " , the overall focus being explications on indigenous ideas of what it means to be a human being , how the associated attributes are conceptualized , and patterns of behaviour . 

  The following themes were suggested for consideration by the speakers : 

  indigenous concepts of human nature , noting possible differences in values and ideas with regard to different categories within the society , e. g. men and women , " commoners " and " aristocrats " ; 

  the whole range of concepts concerning inner states of all kinds and their elaborations and meanings ; 

  techniques and mechanisms of childrearing ; 

  techniques and mechanisms of social interaction and control ; 

  attitudes to , and handling of , deviant social behaviour . 

  The Conference took place in June 1986 at the University of Edinburgh . 

  In addition to anthropologists , we were fortunate in hearing from two psychologists a report on their research into the development of communication and knowledge in human infants , and the theory of innate human co-operative awareness and the " need for culture " ( Trevarthen and Logotheti ) . 

  Some of the anthropologists chose not to refer to their ethnographic experience but to address more general issues of methodology and definition ( Carrithers , Campbell , Heelas ) , but the majority of the papers are embedded in the particularity of an ethnographic setting . 

  It is within ethnography that we feel anthropologists have a significant contribution to make to the vexed questions of human aggression and violence . 

  Anthropology is bound up with the understanding of lived circumstances rather than abstract thought , the basis of anthropological knowledge being first and always ethnography . 

  However , description is not a privileged area of objective study , and the presentation of socio-cultural conditions of other societies can not be viewed as a final explanation of other institutions and values , but must be thought of as part of the observer's reconstruction of their own understanding of the institutions and values . 

  This is particularly so in the case of the topic of the papers in this volume -- namely peace as a social value . 

  Western thinkers and the public are concerned -- morally and intellectually -- with understanding the part played by aggression and conflict in the construction and maintenance of social life . 

  While conflict is taken as given , it is also regarded as problematic . 

  It is , however , largely our problem , rather than that of many societies which we study . 

  Papers dealing with the issues of peace and violence are therefore especially influenced by Western preoccupations . 

  For this reason , it is important to examine those societies that appear to contradict much of scientific and commonsensical explanation . 

  We feel that anthropologists are uniquely positioned to introduce a few question marks into the fundamental assumption of the discourse , and it is our hope that this book will provide some such . 

  We feel that the main contribution of this volume to existing debate lies in the actual ethnographic presentations of peaceful societies , with the overall interpretation being explications on indigenous conceptions of human nature and categories of emotions . 

  We have therefore decided to place that section first . 

  The general theoretical discussion on concepts and definitions is therefore -- perhaps surprisingly -- put at the end . 

  These parts are separated by two papers which present the key concepts of innate sociality and intersubjectivity . 

  The Conference received generous financial support from the Seminars Committee of the University of Edinburgh Faculty of Social Sciences and from the Munro Lectureship Fund , University of Edinburgh . 

  We wish to thank both these bodies for the support without which the Conference could not have taken place . 

  Oslo , June 1988 Signe Howell 

  INTRODUCTION 

  SIGNE HOWELL AND ROY WILLIS 

  WHAT ANTHROPOLOGISTS CAN CONTRIBUTE 

  Debates about human aggression have been dominated by psychologists and ethologists . 

  Too many of them treat aggression as an innate drive in the individual of the species , so that society enters the picture merely as a modifying influence -- if indeed it enters at all . 

  Although there are important differences between the various theories , the great majority of researchers assert that " aggression " ( however defined ; see below for a discussion on definitions ) is an integral part of human nature ; and that aggressive impulses and behaviour have somehow to be directed and controlled for human relations to be sustained over time in a social setting . 

  Scientists present their ideas to the general public , contributing directly or indirectly to debates in social , legal , and religious domains . 

  Their views on questions of human aggression and violence therefore assume major importance in the moral community of which they form a part . 

  The question of what explanatory status one is to accord " aggressive drives " in violent ( and undesirable ) behaviour underlies many socio-legal debates . 

  If part of human nature , to what extent are they legitimate as explanation ? 

  To what extent should one draw upon socio-economic factors to explain such behaviour ? 

  To what extent must the individual be held responsible for him/ herself ? 

  These are vexed questions that involve the whole community in Western societies : scientists , professionals , and the general public . 

  The rather surprising introduction of a moral dimension to this apparently scientific debate does , however , render it ambiguous -- an ambiguity which becomes even more manifest when scientists present their ideas to a wider audience . 

  It is therefore extremely important that their findings should be presented as theories , not facts ( see Kuhn 1962 , and Feyerabend 1978 for discussion on the issues involved ) . 

  Despite the massive increase in the volume of research in psychology and ethology , little progress seems to have been made . 

  We wish to propose an alternative approach , challenging the assumption that aggression is an innate human drive . 

  It is undeniably the case that in Western society aggression is regarded as part of human nature . 

  But perhaps this tells us more about Western society than about human nature . 

  We wish to suggest that we can not assume an a priori aggressive drive in humans . 

  The presence of innate sociality , on the other hand , has much evidence in its favour . 

  Humans are a priori sociable beings ; it is their co-operativeness that has enabled them to survive , not their aggressive impulses . 

  Such an assumption underlies the ethnographic papers in this volume , and the argument will be further elaborated below . 

  Within social anthropology there has , in recent years , emerged a new interest in such questions , adopting a cross-cultural , comparative approach to the study of war , aggression , and violence . 

  Several edited volumes have been published that deal specifically with these issues . 

  However , their sole interest has , in almost every case , been to explain the violent aspects of societies ( see e. g. Bramson and Goethals 1964 ; Bohannan 1967 ; Fried et al . 1967 ; Vayda 1976 ; Ferguson 1984 ; Le Crone Foster et al . 1986 ; Riches 1986 ) . 

  The opposite of violent behaviour , namely peaceful cohabitation on a societal scale , has -- with the notable exception of Montagu ( 1978 ) -- been ignored . 

  As Klama has recently observed in a penetrating critique of the literature on " aggression " , there is a close correspondence between certain popular conceptions of human nature in our society and a number of influential scientific theories to do with the " biological basis of human behaviour " ( Klama 1988 : 52 ) . 

  We believe that social anthropologists can contribute more to the debates , in both empirical and theoretical terms . 

  First , we can present descriptions and interpretations of societies that do not conform to the Western model of humans as essentially aggressive . 

  We can do this by presenting societies whose ideological construction of human nature and behaviour is such as to favour peaceful coexistence . 

  Second , we can offer an alternative way of understanding society , by setting human ideas and behaviour firmly within a sociocultural context , focusing explicitly on indigenous ideas and values concerning human nature . 

  Most of the anthropologists represented in this volume have worked in societies in which the empirical evidence is such as to cast doubt on conventional wisdom . 

  The typical Western attitude is aptly expressed by David Hume , writing more than two centuries ago in his famous essay An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding of 1748 . 

  Should a traveller , returning from a far country , bring us an account of men wholly different from any with whom we were ever acquainted ; men who were entirely divested of vice , ambition , or revenge ; who knew no pleasure but friendship , generosity , and public spirit ; we should immediately , from these circumstances , detect the falsehood , and prove him a liar , with the same certainty as if he ha[d ] stuffed his narration with stories of centaurs and dragons , miracles and prodigies ( quoted in Freeman 1984 : 95 ) . 

  Such , however , seem to be the tales that the anthropologists in this volume have brought home with them . 

  Are we all to be ridiculed ? 

  Have we simply not done our job as fieldworkers properly ? 

  Or is there some way in which we can accept and make sense of what we found to be the case ? 

  Grappling with this problem has led us to reject a sharp either/ or dichotomy in terms of innate versus cultural , and instead to posit the existence in human beings of innate potentialities and capacities -- as well as innate constraints -- that may be turned to peaceful as much as to warlike ends , potentialities and capacities that are necessarily set within the particularity of a moral and semantic universe . 

  As Carrithers and Trevarthen and Logotheti argue in this volume , it is primarily with the construction of such moral and semantic universes ( or " cultures " ) that the innate potentialities , capacities , and constraints are concerned . 

  PROBLEMS OF DEFINITIONS 

  Biological , psychoanalytic , ethological , ecological , social learning , and cognitive theorists have all attempted to further our understanding of aggression . 

  Most would agree that we are far from any theoretical consensus . 

  Marsh and Campbell ( 1982 ) attribute the lack of progress to a number of factors , including the difficulty of studying aggression both in laboratory and naturalistic settings , and to the compartmentalization of the academic world which leads to lack of communication across disciplines . 

  While we agree with this , we would add another major obstacle , namely problems of definition of the object of study . 

  Aggression or violence : emotion or behaviour ? 

  The debate is bedevilled by the problem of definition ; a problem which is exacerbated by a common failure to clarify whether aggression is an experiential state or a way of behaving . 

  The conflation of the two confuses the issue , and reinforces the tendency for the behaviour to be reduced to an inner state -- and hence rendered less open to investigation . 

  Thus aggression is often taken as synonymous with violence ; violent behaviour being taken as proof of the existence of an inner state called aggression . 

  A brief scanning of the literature reveals numerous unquestioned assumptions and a high degree of confusion and contradiction in what is being talked about . 

  Warfare , for example , is often taken as proof of human aggressive impulses ; but as Montagu ( 1976 ) tellingly points out , we can assume no aggressive feeling in the pilot dropping powerful bombs from a great height . 

  War is a social , not a psychological , fact . 

  The problem amounts to isolating criteria according to which we can identify an aggressive act . 

  Is it correct to claim , as Marsh does , that aggression is " the inflicting of physical hurt " with its associated aim of " subduing or achieving dominance over a rival " ( 1978 : 33 ) or should one follow Eibl-Eibesfeldt's broader definition and classify behaviour as aggressive " if it leads to another party's being hurt ; this includes not just physical hurt ( injury or destruction ) but any kind of hurt , including annoyance , taunts or insults " ( 1978 : 29 ) ? 

  Siann , in a recent study Accounting for Aggression which gives an excellent overview of existing theories and positions , does make a distinction between aggression and violence . 

  According to her , aggression " involves the intention to hurt or emerge superior to others , does not necessarily involve physical injury ( violence ) and may or may not be regarded as being underpinned by different kinds of motives " . 

  Violence " involves the use of great physical force or intensity and , while it is often impelled by aggressive motivation , may occasionally be used by individuals in a mutual violent interaction which is regarded by both parties as intrinsically rewarding " ( Siann 1985 : 12 ) . 

  While she does have the merit , in contrast to the majority of researchers , of making the distinction between an inner state and an outward act , her definitions do not emerge as analytic categories to be employed for comparative purposes -- mainly because they do not avoid the problem of reification , raised below . 

  Heelas has also given a survey of the different attempts at defining aggression , and the main theories which account for it ( Heelas 1982 , 1983 ) . 

  In this volume , he argues against " essentialism " , by which he means the application of a cross-culturally applicable definition based on some " essence " of aggression which then can be " employed to " read off " the nature of acts " . 

  In a similar vein Gibson ( this volume ) argues , " The most basic issue is whether we are to define aggression without reference to native concepts . 

  Those who argue that a universal definition of aggression is possible and even desirable are often interested ... in whether the members of one society can be said to be " more aggressive " than another according to some quantitative scale " . 

  Both Heelas and Gibson , as well as the rest of the contributors to this volume , are extremely sceptical of the viability of such an enterprise . 

  In a discussion concerning the use and meaning of the Anglo-Saxon term " violence " , Riches makes the pertinent point , 

  the analysis could be damagingly influenced by the " folk " theories about violence which obtain in the analyst's lay culture . 

  Stressing the apparent universality , intractability and unacceptability of the problem of violence , the theories prominent in Anglo-Saxon lay ideas focus strongly on the irrationality and bestiality of violence ... the approach to violence advocated in the discipline of ethology -- in which violence is seen at least partly as having genetic determinants -- is rather close to Anglo-Saxon folk ideas . 

  ( 1986 : 2 ) 

  Thus , research on humans , or research that has implications for explaining humans , is rarely , if ever , neutral . 

  This of course applies equally to those who make substantive universalistic claims for a fundamentally peaceful drive in humans . 

  Historically , in the West , the idea that there is in human nature some intrinsic element or principle which drives human beings to commit damaging and destructive actions is of considerable antiquity and is deeply embedded in the Judaeo-Christian tradition of innate sinfulness . 

  The concept of aggression , however , is of relatively recent origin . 

  Although the Oxford English Dictionary cites several seventeenth-century literary uses of the word , its vogue in academic and popular discourse derives from twentieth-century psychoanalysis and animal ethology . 

  Etymologically , as Fromm reminds us ( 1973 : 189 ) , the English word is based on two Latin words , ad and gradior , with the combined sense of " movement towards " . 

  It would appear to have been adopted in psychoanalysis because of its air of scientific detachment and objectivity , its freedom from the objectionable religious overtones of such terms as " sin " and " evil " . 

  It is ironic , therefore , that Freud , the anti-religious father of psychoanalysis , should have chosen to use the term aggression as implicitly synonymous with evil and wickedness in his well-known and passionate indictment of his own species : 

  Men are not gentle , friendly creatures wishing for love , who simply defend themselves if they are attacked , but ... a powerful measure of desire for aggression has to be reckoned as part of their instinctual endowment ... 

  Homo homini lupus : who has the courage to dispute it in the face of all evidence in his own life and in history ? 

  This aggressive cruelty usually lies in wait for some provocation . 

  ( Freud 1939 : 50 , 51 ) 

  In the scientific and popular cultures of our civilization Freud's ideas have acquired the status of virtually self-evident truth . 

  In the widely read book Human Aggression , the psychoanalyst Anthony Storr draws our attention to the " sombre fact that we are the cruellest and most ruthless species that has ever walked the earth " ( 1968 : i ) . 

  The above quotes demonstrate , above all , that there is a strong tradition in the West to regard human beings as innately aggressive in our psychic make-up and , resulting from this , violent in our behaviour . 

  Reification 

  Many writers , from different disciplines , treat aggression ( or aggressive behaviour , if the distinction is made ) as a discernible phenomenon , a discrete category which can be studied in isolation from a social and semantic context . 

  Regardless of their theoretical predilections , working definitions , and methods of obtaining data , all such approaches have the effect of hypostasizing something called " aggression " . 

  In our view all such definitions are generic , subject to the " fallacy of misplaced concreteness " ( Whitehead 1925 ) . 

  Aggression becomes a category or phenomenon whose presence or absence is a matter for empirical investigation . 

  Such has been the assumption underlying much of previous anthropological literature also . 

  But it is precisely the sort of presupposition which anthropologists should challenge , allowing , as it does , so little place for a social construction of knowledge and values and so much for ( unexplained ) " human nature " . 

  There is therefore a need to question this assumption that aggression is a given element which somehow has to be accounted for . 

  Campbell ( this volume ) argues that the search for absolute categories for comparative purposes in various societies is a fruitless enterprise . 

  Instead he proposes an approach that asks the question " How do these people deal with certain basic human predicaments ? " and makes the pertinent point that " the problem is not the quality we have isolated , e. g. , aggression , but how far we can get with an adequate description of what we have found " . 

  If one persists in treating the phenomenon " aggression " as just that : as a phenomenon or fixed category finding an expression in violent behaviour , rather than treating violent behaviour as the resultant of values acted out , one is forced into simplistic either/ or terms , as in the nature versus nurture debates ( see below ) . 

  In interpreting ideas and behaviour in societies which others might characterize as " peaceful " , we suggest abandoning the focus on the lack of something called " aggression " ( or violence ) and the construction of theories that attempt to account for this " anomalous " absence . 

  Instead , we advocate an alternative approach that dispenses with universalistic definitions and the testing of these . 

  This came out strongly during the Conference , and there was general agreement between the participants that a more fruitful approach is to try to locate interpersonal , or intersocietal , behaviour within the wider discourse of ideology and practice of the society in question . 

  In particular , what is the indigenous theory concerning human nature ? 

  What metaphysical constructs embellish the theory ? 

  What social and interpersonal practices do they give rise to ? 

  What are the mechanisms by which behaviour is directed and controlled ? 

  Violent behaviour , in the most general sense , can only be understood in association with other behaviour within the same society . 

  Behaviour is never culturally neutral , but always embedded within a shared set of meanings . 

  Markedness in language 

  An accepted notion that aggression is a given characteristic in humans everywhere leads to a search for it in various social settings . 

  This , however , begs the question and determines the formulation of research , phrasing the questions in terms of how aggressive drives are handled . 

  The vocabulary of the debates reflects this , for the contrast is drawn between aggression and non-aggression , violence and non-violence ; it is the absence of conflict , not the presence of something else that is noted . 

  The whole emphasis is placed on the terms being negated , thereby reflecting a profound bias towards aggression as the norm . 

  Such a usage of a negation is in conformity with all linguistic markedness and unmarkedness . 

  The marked term is usually short , learned early in life , resistant to acculturative replacement , morphologically simple , generic ( as opposed to specific ) , commonly used , phonologically and orthographically simple ; and the unmarked term displays all the reverse characteristics . 

  Hence our preference for the terms " peace " and " peaceful " which embody all the advantages of markedness while at the same time better express our general position in this particular instance . 

  " Peace " and " peaceful " are not , however , intended as universalistic analytic terms , but their usage is intended to mark a fundamental shift in theoretical focus . 

  Of course these too can be criticized on the grounds that they lack precision , and carry with them built-in biases , impeding both our understanding of our own field experience as well as obstructing cross-cultural understanding . 

  It is our hope that the papers in this collection go some way towards rebutting such charges . 

  WHAT IS THE APPEAL OF THE INNATE AGGRESSIONIST APPROACH ? 

  Introductory remarks 

  The view of human nature as fundamentally aggressive can be expected to prevail in those domains where it corresponds with social and cultural ideology . 

  Carrithers ( this volume ) makes a useful distinction between science and pop science . 

  By the latter he means theories that confirm , unreflectedly , our prejudices . 

  Man thought of as the aggressive animal confirms such Western prejudices . 

  The view that aggression is an integral part of human nature has been strongly argued for a long time by exceptionally articulate and persuasive individuals . 

  Many of them have directed their writings to a popular audience , and as Ferguson says , " in doing so , have often sacrificed standards of logic and evidence in favor of the pithy illustration or memorable quote " ; and he continues " Wilson [ 1978 : 99 ] raises the favorite question of college seminars and cocktail party conversations which is , " are human beings innately aggressive ? " 

  His answer is a flat yes . 

  It is this unqualified yes that will be remembered at the seminars and cocktail parties , when his pages of qualification or the tepid conclusions ... are long forgotten " ( 1984 : 11 ) . 

  The better known propounders of innate human aggression are Lorenz ( 1966 ) , Morris ( 1967 ) , Ardrey ( 1966 ) , Storr ( 1968 ) , Konner ( 1984 ; see Carrithers , this volume ) , Tiger and Fox ( 1971 ) , Tiger ( 1969 ) , and Eibl-Eibesfeldt ( 1979 ) : all of whom , to varying degrees , base their conclusions on animal behaviour and link these with a theory of the role of violence in hominid evolution . 

  A salutary cautionary note is sounded by Zillmann who concludes after a painstaking review of experimental evidence that " the amount of relevant data on animal aggression from both laboratory and field investigations is nearly overwhelming . 

  In sharp contrast , research findings concerning the specific differences between animals and man in the mechanics of aggression are almost nonexistent " ( 1979 : 7 ) . 

  While ethologists , like Zillmann , do not necessarily agree with the views of the innate aggressionists , their voices are not heard outside their own circle . 

  The arguments of those who confirm the pop notions have been readily incorporated into popular Western consciousness , finding rich and varied expression in the arts and media . 

  No doubt there are numerous and complex reasons for the strength of Western adherence to such views . 

  They are to be looked for in our Western indigenous psychological explanations as much as in the domains of scientific pursuit which , as Riches notes above , are not themselves free from such ontological conceptions . 

  To our mind , they can be usefully examined under the following four headings . 

  Man as animal 

  Members of most non-Western societies regard themselves as the most superior form of being , in possession of the most desirable qualities . 

  Westerners , on the other hand , attribute to themselves many characteristics they most dislike and , moreover , grant these a powerful explanatory role . 

  The fact that , biologically speaking , we belong to the animal kingdom is frequently used as an explanation for violent behaviour , and the animal metaphor is frequently invoked . 

  William Golding's novel Lord of the Flies , read by many British school-children , is seen as an example of the innately brutal characteristics of humans . 

  Schoolboys reveal themselves as having only a thin veneer of " civilization " which , once the constraints of authority are removed , disappears , laying bare their " true nature " which is violent , domineering , and competitive , resulting in the survival of the fittest in a most literal sense . 

  Similarly , the violence in many sections of our own society today is , in the media , taken as proof of " the animal nature of man " which -- an insult to many animals -- is always understood to be destructively aggressive . 

  Similarly , " the law of the jungle " , meaning , in fact , the absence of any laws , metaphorically links humans and animals . 

  Such theories take the individual as the starting point ; and the inherent sociality that we are arguing for -- and which precludes any form of methodological individualism -- is given little or no credence . 

  As becomes clear from most of the papers in this collection , this particular view of human nature is not one shared by many other societies . 

  They may attribute unattractive and negatively valued characteristics to their enemies or neighbours , but most certainly not to themselves . 

  Authoritarianism 

  Second , and related to the first point , the model of man as a violent animal -- and hence self-seeking and violent in the pursuit of attaining his goals -- is useful as a justification for authority and institutions of authority . 

  It is also found at the base of the neo-classical economic theory of capitalism , with its basic tenet of man as a maximizing individual with limitless needs and desires -- a notion Sahlins deconstructed many years ago ( 1974 ) , but one that still persists in Western economic and political thought , and which underlies much of the anthropology of conflict . 

  Such thinking is part of a long tradition , finding its most clear formulation in the political philosophy of Hobbes where human society is presented as being in a state of " warre " in which every man fights every other man for control of resources and for the ( presumed ) pleasure of dominance . 

  Hobbes' extreme views are often juxtaposed with those of Rousseau , who viewed human nature as innately " good " and attributes the manifest defects in human behaviour to the corrupting effects of " society " or of " culture " . 

  Subsequent debates have tended to favour the Hobbesian view , arguing for institutions of authority , and dismissing Rousseau as a romantic utopianist who simply did not accept people for what they " really are " . 

  Robarchek ( this volume ) sets his discussion of the Semai within the frame of what he argues has become a " sterile dichotomy in Western thought " as a direct result of the ideas of these two philosophers . 

  Sexism 

  Third , the views of the innate aggressionists and their followers reflect -- and implicitly reinforce -- sexism , since it is usually man who is presented in the Hobbesian mould , with a sleight-of-hand extension of man into Man . 

  Here the subject of enquiry purports to be an understanding of human nature , whereas the object of study is in fact the male half of society . 

  Woman is either ignored or presented as innately less aggressive than man . 

  The arguments for a biological difference in the sexes in this regard are far from conclusive , but in cases where such a difference is put forward , the general conclusions of humanity's aggressive nature are not revised . 

  Examples are too numerous to list , but a particularly telling one from members of our own profession , where one might expect some awareness , can serve . 

  In their book The Imperial Animal , Tiger and Fox state , 

  While possessing females is important to the young males , and is in some sense the whole point of the evolutionary process , it is not necessarily the basic motivating factor [ in intra-male fighting ] . 

  The possession of a female or females can be viewed as one more validation of male status , which is an end in itself , because , once achieved , the women follow anyway . 

  Whatever the advocates of student power do want -- and it is not always clear -- one thing they plainly do not want is access to their professors' wives ( 1971 : 111 ) . 

  The " imperial animal " of the title is exclusively male , whether he be the shaper of human evolution or the intellectual of today . 

  Similar underlying assumptions can be found in Chagnon's famous study of the Yanomamo . 

  He explains male Yanomamo violence as individual competition motivated less by considerations of material well-being than by " reproductive striving " ( 1983 : 86 ) , i. e. , men compete over access to women and the subsequent offspring . 

  These assertions , that men need to compete and that women are an important object of competition , are contradicted by evidence from at least four of the societies described in this volume ( Overing , Robarchek , Howell , Willis ) . 

  Siann concludes that evidence from hormonal studies and ethology is extremely ambiguous and that no conclusions can be drawn with regard to male and female behaviour or emotions , and that psychoanalytic approaches can not produce any firm answers on questions of sex and gender ( Siann 1985 : 33-9 , 82-4 , 123-8 ) . 

  Again , the ethnographic examples of Semai , Chewong , and Piaroa demonstrate that indigenous views regarding emotional and behavioural differences in men and women need not necessarily be conceptualized . 

  Militarism 

  Fourth , the Western post-war build-up of defence is partially justified in the above terms . 

  The nuclear arms race , and East-West conflict , is seen as inevitable given that human nature is what it is ( namely competitive , aggressive , and combative ) and the consequent pessimism shared by a large proportion of Western Europe's population concerning the possibility of nuclear war is again expressed in such terms . 

  War is popularly perceived as part and parcel of what it means to be human , and , with ever increasing deadly weapons , the devastating impact of war is consequently accepted as inevitable . 

  Some critical comments 

  Culture , the pre-eminently human factor , has , in much ethology , socio-biology , psychology , and psychoanalysis , been either ignored totally , or at best relegated to a secondary position , a modifying role . 

  Yet Robin Fox , who works from within a socio-biological framework , concedes , rather surprisingly , that " symbol-making is as much a human attribute as sex and food " ( 1982 : 13 ) . 

  This important point is often ignored , and can in our view be taken further ; to suggest that in human society there are no natural and neutral phenomena . 

  Acts like eating , sexual intercourse , and fighting are embedded in a socially shared set of associated symbols , and they can not be isolated from this semantic setting . 

  This is true of human behaviour of all kinds , and of human emotions . 

  None is an objective phenomenon to be studied in isolation ; they are all constructed from within the society in question and can only be interpreted in conjunction with other social ideas , in particular indigenous ideas concerning human nature . 

  AGGRESSION AND VIOLENCE IN ANTHROPOLOGICAL THEORY 

  Social anthropologists have not , on the whole , been very interested in the general empirical study of aggression , violence , and peacefulness . 

  In British social anthropology , the implicit assumption has been that humans are violent , and that society in various ways controls and constrains . 

  Theories were developed that might be regarded as dealing with such issues only in the field of conflict . 

  Here two main theoretical strands can be isolated . 

  First , how conflict permeates and shapes human interaction and social organization , and second , how the idea of conflict helps elucidate the genesis , escalation , de-escalation , and consequences of combat , violent confrontation , wars , etc . 

  In British and American anthropology , such issues were rarely dealt with directly , but were linked to four main theoretical approaches : cultural relativism , legal and political anthropology , the study of ritual , and bio-ecological determinism . 

  We will allude briefly to the main points , as we see them , of these approaches . 

  ( For a detailed presentation of anthropological theories concerning the study of war and conflict , see Ferguson's " Introduction " to Warfare , Culture , and Environment ( 1984 ) which , while adhering to a " materialist " approach , nevertheless provides a useful overview of , other anthropological views . ) 

  Cultural relativism 

  Most social anthropologists probably adhere to some form of " soft " cultural relativism , whereby the thrust of explanation of human ideas and behaviour is placed within the framework of the particular sociocultural institutions of a society . 

  They thus decline to proffer a general , universal theory ; while at the same time postulating an unexamined " psychic unity of mankind " . 

  A " harder " version was expressed in the old " nurture versus nature " debate of the pre-war era , in which American anthropologists in particular , following the lead of Boas , engaged themselves . 

  The so-called Culture and Personality school of the 1920s , 1930s , and 1940s held that human behaviour was the provenance of culture , not of race , and attempts were made to relate traits of individual personality and symbolic aspects of culture to socialization variables ( Lipsey 1985 : 180 ) . 

  The debate was recently brought to life again with Freeman's forceful attack on the work by Margaret Mead from Samoa ( Freeman 1984 ) . 

  Mead was one of the best-known anthropologists arguing for a nurture perspective on human behaviour . 

  As such , she was an adherent of the particular alliance between psychological behaviourism and cultural relativism which Boas favoured and -- which won widespread acceptance in American anthropology . 

  Freeman was particularly out to demolish Mead's suggestion ( 1928 ) that Samoan society is characterized by values emphasizing uninhibited playfulness and peaceful co-existence , accusing her of having misunderstood Samoan society . 

  This is not the place to discuss the intricacies of the argument and those it gave rise to in the anthropological press ( for a cross section of the arguments see , e. g. , Strathern 1983 ; Brady 1983 ) ; the purpose in raising it is to note the continued appeal of the debate and to point out Freeman's confident rejection of the possibility of a peaceful society . 

  Much of the debate surrounding cultural relativism has been polarized into extreme -- and ultimately simplistic -- either/ or terms , as in the nature versus nurture debates . 

  However , the excesses of " pop socio-biology " should not , as Carrithers points out ( in this volume ) , lead us to a wholesale rejection of the evidence for certain genetically transmitted predispositions in the human animal . 

  To assert that all normal human behaviour is culturally moulded does not necessarily prove that it is also culturally determined . 

  Such has been the assumption behind much work in socio-cultural anthropology . 

  Like pop socio-biology it bears the unmistakable imprint of a particular cultural view of the world , resulting in a projection of ethnographic " material " onto inert " other cultures " . 

  Carrithers states , " My intention is not at all to replace the notion of culture , but to argue that sociality is a necessary precondition for the existence of culture . " 

  Even more importantly , there is every reason to believe , with Mary Midgley , that the basic assumption behind cultural relativism/ behaviourism that human beings are totally plastic and devoid of innate structuration is false : " Sensible psychologists have tended more and more to admit that people do have some genetically fixed tendencies " and she continues that " What makes this admission hard , is the very strong impression still prevalent that we have to choose between considering these tendencies and considering outside conditions " ( 1979 : 20 ) . 

  As anthropologists we stress context as a methodological necessity . 

  The danger in exclusively privileging the socio-cultural context in the interpretation of human institutions and behaviour is that every social phenomenon becomes so context-dependent that it can not be translated across cultures . 

  While avoiding strict definitions of social categories , we can nevertheless examine manifestations of how humans in different social settings seek answers to the general existential questions . 

  By accepting an innate predilection to sociality and a fluid range of capacities and constraints , we can focus on indigenous conceptions concerning human nature and human inner states , while avoiding the particularistic errors of cultural relativism . 

  Political and legal anthropology 

  Many of the anthropologists dealing with political organization have chosen to approach this from a conflict perspective . 

  Bohannan in his introduction to the American Museum Sourcebooks in Anthropology entitled Law and Warfare states " We shall never banish conflict ... 

  Rather conflict must be controlled and must be utilized profitably in order to create more and better cultural means of living and working together " ( 1967 : xi ) . 

  And he continues , " We need a new " code of aggressions " ... 

  Conflict is useful . 

  In fact , society is impossible without conflict . 

  But society is worse than impossible without control of conflict ... 

  Total repression of conflict leads to anarchy just as surely as does total conflict' ( ibid . xii ) . 

  Such a view echoes that of Freud . 

  The existence of this tendency to aggression ... makes it necessary for culture to institute its high demands . 

  Culture ... has to erect barriers against the aggressive instincts of men and hold their manifestations in check by reaction-formations in men's minds ( 1939 : 51 ) . 

  The job of the anthropologist from such a perspective becomes to demonstrate ethnographically how different societies handle conflict through the various political and legal institutions . 

  The 1940s and 1950s saw a great number of ethnographic studies in the British functionalist and structural -- functionalist modes , whereby social institutions were analysed in terms of how they maintain the status quo of the particular society . 

  One of the most explicit political theories of that period is that of Gluckman . 

  In his famous essay " The Peace in the Feud " ( 1955 ) conflict is again the analytic starting-point for the understanding of society , and the problem is most severe in the analysis of so-called acephalous societies . 

  " Where do social order and cohesion lie in such societies ? " he asks . 

  Gluckman's thesis is that in these societies , the fundamental propensity in men to quarrel is held in check by cross-cutting allegiances . 

  Thus , 

  This is the central theme of my thesis -- how men quarrel in terms of their customary allegiances , but are restrained from violence through other conflicting alliances which are also enjoined on them by custom . 

  The result is that conflicts in one set of relationships , over a wide range of society , or over a long period of time , lead to the re-establishment of social cohesion ( 1955 : 2 ) . 

  In other words , paradoxically , feuding has a place in society to maintain the status quo . 

  Similar studies were all analysed with an overall framework of interrelating forms of social organization with the frequency and manifestation of social conflict . 

  Ritual as catharsis 

  A different , though often related , approach can be found in one of the several " displacement of aggression " theories . 

  Here , aggression is taken as a given which must find some outlet . 

  Dollard et al . ( 1969 ) are generally credited with the formulation of the " frustration-aggression hypothesis " whereby it is held that the obstruction of goal-oriented behaviour leads necessarily to aggression . 

  This , like most of the purely psychological theories -- including psychoanalytic ones -- are strictly methodological-individualistic . 

  Thus they are based on the individual psyche and make a theoretical leap from this to the universal psyche . 

  There are , however , some anthropologists who have tried to translate Dollard's ideas into social terms . 

  Frustrations on a group scale may be explained in terms of the group finding release by going to war with its neighbours , or through a collective cathartic experience such as a ritual performance . 

  Internal tensions can be resolved through a creative channelling and thereby reinforce the group's own boundary . 

  But it is probably more at an implicit , unexamined , level that much anthropological writing adheres to the frustration-aggression hypothesis . 

  Ritual has been regarded by several anthropologists as a social event in which pent-up emotions can find some form of release . 

  Malinowski ( 1964 ) argues that ritual served an important function in that it alleviated the anxiety of the participants in areas of uncertainty . 

  Radcliffe-Brown ( 1952 ) and Evans-Pritchard ( 1965 ) denied this , stating that there was no a priori reason for not assuming the opposite , namely that ritual creates anxiety , and that the task of the anthropologist was not to infer psychological states in others , but to focus on the sociological significance of social institutions : ritual being one such . 

  Nevertheless , the " pressure cooker " metaphor , through which violent and potentially destructive emotions must find an outlet , has frequently been applied in the study of ritual and ecstatic religious behaviour . 

  Turner in his studies of Ndembu symbols and ritual ( 1957 and 1967 ) tried explicitly to bring together a sociological and a psychological explanatory framework for the understanding of ritual . 

  He suggested that one of the functions of ritual is the shedding of " bad " feelings , being the final resort in conflict-solving in what he calls " social drama " . 

  Turner , however , also allowed for the possibility that rituals do in themselves provoke strong emotions ; emotions which then have to be directed . 

  Such anthropological theories are linked to the catharsis theory , whereby it is held that through some dramatic experience the individual ( or group ) sheds itself of pent-up , potentially destructive , emotions to emerge cleansed and ready to deal with daily life in a harmonious manner . 

  Like the " pop " version of innate aggression , there is in the West today a similar " pop " version of the necessity for catharsis . 

  Howell ( this volume ) takes up some of these issues in her paper where she argues against the interpretation of ritual as catharsis among the Chewong . 

  Much of Western psychotherapy draws , in various forms , on the catharsis model , whereby it is held as necessary for emotional health to come to terms with the repressed anger that is assumed to be inside the individual , and techniques are developed to make the individual confront these in a dramatic form . 

  The sociologist Scheff is probably the social scientist who has attempted the most thoroughgoing analysis of catharsis in social life . 

  In his book Catharsis in Healing , Ritual , and Drama much of previous psychological and anthropological thinking around the issue is incorporated . 

  His is an attempt to put emotions firmly back into studies of social behaviour and he concludes that catharsis is a potentially useful mechanism for psychic health , and that repression of emotions produces instability . 

  Although he allows for many areas of uncertainty in the study of catharsis , Scheff nevertheless accepts the universality of the need to handle destructive emotions , and proposes that ritual , as a cathartic experience , be reinstated in the West as " a dramatic form for coping with universal distress " ( 1979 : 114 ) . 

  While we agree that emotions should become a legitimate study for anthropologists , we nevertheless feel that the degree of consensus is minimal in such matters and that , for the time being at least , we should abandon universalistic explanatory models , and instead locate such studies within the indigenous understanding . 

  Socio-biology and ecological materialism 

  Much of the systematic anthropological work on war and conflict in recent years has been made within an ecological or socio-biological analytical framework . 

  While there are major differences between the two , we have chosen to refer to them together . 

  Socio-biology drew much of its inspiration from the zoologist E. O. Wilson who proclaimed in 1975 the birth of a new synthetic super-discipline that would merge social science with biology , and which he named sociobiology . 

  This particular theoretical stance has found most of its adherents amongst American anthropologists . 

  Ferguson gives a historical outline of the various approaches which he terms " materialist " . 

  With regard to their treatment of the present topic , he says , " A materialist approach to war focuses on war's relations to the practical problems of maintaining life and living standards . 

  Since 1960 , this usually has meant studying war in relation to local ecology " ( 1984 : 23 ) . 

  He distinguishes two main types of ecological studies : the origins and evolution of wars and the function of wars . 

  Much has been written by social anthropologists against the materialist approaches in ethnographic analysis . 

  In our view , we can do no better than quote from Sahlin's direct attack on sociobiology : 

  Consider the relation between warfare and human aggression what Wilson at one point calls " the true , biological joy of warfare " . 

  It is evident that the people engaged in fighting wars -- or for that matter , any kind of fighting -- are by no means necessarily aggressive , either in the course of action or beforehand . 

  Many are plainly terrified . 

  People engaged in wars may have any number of motivations to do so ... ethnographically the energies that move men to fight are practically coterminous with the range of human motivations ( 1977 : 7 ) . 

  And later , 

  For between the basic drives that may be attributed to human nature and the social structures of human culture there enters a critical indeterminacy . 

  The same human motives appear in different cultural forms , and different motives appear in the same forms ( ibid . : 

  11 ) . 

  AN ALTERNATIVE APPROACH 

  The idea of human nature and sociality as innate capacity 

  We have on several occasions referred to the interpretative importance of indigenous constructions of human nature and human emotionality . 

  We know of no empirical examples of a society that does not , however implicitly , hold collective views on what it means to be a human being . 

  Indeed , " Every religion includes an image of personhood " ( Harris 1978 : 76 ) . 

  Ideas concerning human nature can thus be said to constitute a human universal . 

  If this is so , then we feel that there is a way out of the various impasses discussed above . 

  By placing our theoretical focus in the interpretation of other societies on the social constructions of personhood , we lay the foundation for a legitimate comparative enterprise . 

  Moreover , by accepting the overwhelming evidence that there are innate human capacities , predilections , and constraints , we can take a step further in such an enterprise . 

  Thus human beings come prepackaged with a set of potential capacities and constraints , but these in themselves are not fixed or determined . 

  Rather , they are a set of directives for an imaginative negotiation which seek specific definition in the cultural setting . 

  Among these may be listed the capacity for co-operative behaviour and the capacity for uncooperative , competitive action ( both conceptual and physical ) . 

  The important point to stress is that humans appear to possess an innate capacity for finding common cause in a great number of cultural activities , a capacity Carrithers in this volume calls " sociality " . 

  Such a capacity would not explain the specific instances of human sociocultural arrangements in their immense variety -- that could only be done by reference to local histories , local circumstances , and local causes but it could explain how such a range and history of variation was possible at all . 

  Such suggestions are borne out by Trevarthen and Logotheti ( this volume ) . 

  They argue , from the evidence of infant behaviour , that Homo sapiens is born with the capacity to participate in the collective understanding ; to learn the meanings of his/ her particular culture . 

  On the basis of many years' detailed observation of infants , they argue for the existence of what they call " innate intersubjectivity " as a universal motivation , present in the newborn and peculiar to our species , that leads the child to acquire symbolic understanding . 

  This means that we have an innate predisposition to experience and act inter-subjectively , beginning with an awareness of ourselves as social beings with emotions in relationship to other social beings who have the same emotions , interests , and intentions which we can perceive . 

  We regard such a theory as providing us , as anthropologists , with a concept of useful explanatory power . 

  Moreover , it allows us to talk more confidently of a psychic and cognitive unity of humanity without limiting us to absolute categories . 

  However , it is important to note that a theory of innate human sociality is not a reductionist theory . 

  Unlike pop socio-biology , which appeals to the gene as the ultimate and fundamental causal factor in human evolution and behaviour , innate sociality supposes a predisposition in human beings towards the continual absorption of existing meanings and the creation of new meanings in local universes of thought that are constantly being discovered , destroyed , and negotiated anew in the process of social interaction . 

  The relation between these inherent motives for culture and society is a matter that requires analysis of the epigenetic regulations of brain growth , about which little is yet known . 

  Thus sociality , together with indigenous theories of human nature , provide a framework for comparison between different societies and cultures , including the various " peaceful societies " described in this volume . 

  As we ( Carrithers , and Trevarthen and Logotheti ) have already noted , sociality , as an innate , presumably genetically inscribed predisposition in all human beings , explains both the existence of the characteristic human ability to construct systems of cultural meaning and the enormous empirical variations observed to occur in such systems . 

  More , the fact that this being , Homo sapiens , is from the moment of birth aware of itself in relation to others , and experiences and defines itself in such a relational mode , suggests the universal , pre-cultural basis of a relational concept that appears to occur in one form or another in all human cultural systems : the complementarity of Self and Other ; Us and Them . 

  Innate " I-Thou " appears , then , to be the origin of cultural " Us-Them " . 

  Always shifting , always situationally determined like the ever-changing systems of cultural meaning in which it is embedded , the Self-Other/ Us-Them boundaries are also the emic ground of kinship and enmity , affiliative and " aggressive " behaviour , peace and war ( see also below ) . 

  It may perhaps have been valid in the past to dichotomize theoretical stances into endogenous ( formulated in terms of what is natural to humans ) and exogenous ( formulated in terms of sociocultural factors ) ( Heelas 1983 ) ; but many biologists today think that there is a built-in capacity for change through learning capable of giving directive impulses for change . 

  Thus , while we may be born with a certain " equipment " this does not necessarily determine behaviour ; and , furthermore , behaviour can alter the equipment . 

  The view that co-operation , not competition , is more conducive for survival is also gaining ground among biologists and ethologists . 

  The ethologist P. Bateson abhors the way competition is used as an explanatory factor in evolutionary theory , and says , 

  The pattern generated by co-operative behaviour could distinguish one social group from another and could mean the difference between group survival and communal death ... 

  It is a travesty of Darwinism to suggest that all that matters in social life is conflict . 

  One individual may be more likely to survive because it is better suited to making its way about its environment and not because it is fiercer than others . 

  Individuals may survive better when they join forces with others ( 1985 : 3 ) . 

  Similar ideas are expressed by Leakey and Lewin : 

  Throughout our recent evolutionary history , particularly since the rise of a hunting way of life , there must have been extreme selective pressures in favour of our ability to co-operate as a group : organized food gathering and hunts are successful only if each member of the band knows his task and joins in with the activity of his fellows ; a good deal of restraint on natural impulses during the stalk and capture of the prey is likewise essential . 

  The degree of selective pressure towards co-operation group awareness , and identification was so strong , and the period over which it operated was so extended ( at least three million years , and probably even longer ) , that it can hardly fail to have become embedded to some measure in our genetic makeup ( 1977 : 209 , emphasis ours ) . 

  While we find this second passage of great interest , we feel that the concept of " natural impulses " is problematic in two ways . 

  First , there would appear to be an assumption that these are in their essence unco-operative , something which we would question , and second , the restraint itself would have to be a natural impulse ! 

  However , if the general points of our argument are right , it seems to us that the innate versus learnt debate loses most of its force ; indeed , the papers in this volume corroborate such findings . 

  We are suggesting , then , that the term " human aggression " as conventionally and commonly used is doubly skewed by ideological influences that are deep-rooted in our Western culture . 

  On the one hand aggression , though " natural " ( particularly in males ) is also condemned as " bad " . 

  On the other hand , its perceived opposite , peacefulness , carries with it the negatively valued connotations of being passive and inert ( qualities which furthermore are associated with females ) . 

  THE ETHNOGRAPHIC PAPERS 

  The ethnographic papers do not provide the " answer " to why human beings are aggressive ( or peaceful ) . 

  We have argued throughout that such a formulation of the problem is inappropriate , for it leads to a reification of human qualities for the purposes of comparison . 

  Violent and peaceful social interaction is not to be understood through the search for a thing called " aggression " , but through the sensitive and detailed explication of the values and meanings that embody and shape behaviour in different social settings . 

  The aim of the ethnographic papers is to understand violent and peaceful behaviour in different societies . 

  We believe that the novelty of our approach lies in the focus adopted for interpretation . 

  We accept the fundamental premiss argued by Carrithers , and Trevarthen and Logotheti that sociality is an innate and necessary capacity in humans . 

  From this we put a major explanatory weight on the indigenous construction of human nature and emotions . 

  This approach is novel insofar as the interpretation of behaviour is embedded in moral values directly associated with what is held to constitute a human person . 

  While we wish to avoid the pitfalls of many earlier studies on " peaceful " or " violent " societies by pulling out one behavioural feature as overridingly important in the analysis , we feel nevertheless that several issues of general interest have emerged , all of which are suggestive for the further understanding of societal peaceful coexistence , and we turn now to a brief consideration of some major points that are raised in the ethnographic papers . 

  Us/ Them 

  It is not uncommon among non-Western societies that humanity is denied to members of other societies . 

  We are the true human beings , they lack something or other , or they are witches , or cannibals ( see Arens ( 1979 ) for a discussion of this theme ) . 

  A stark opposition is drawn between the desirable ( and " good " ) human qualities that we have , and the undesirable ( and " bad " ) qualities that they , the others , the outsiders have . 

  This is a juxtaposition found in many of the societies discussed in this volume . 

  Although they attribute violent characteristics to outsiders , they all see themselves as inherently peaceful . 

  For the Buid , the Chewong , the Semai , the Balinese , and the Piaroa it is always " Them " , the dangerous , non-human outsiders who are violent and warlike . 

  In contrast , the social domain of " Us " is characterized by the absence of combative and destructive behaviour . 

  Buckley's peaceful Northern Ireland community also conforms to this pattern , seeing itself as an island of human values under perpetual " siege " from dangerous , barely human outsiders . 

  On the other hand , the Fipa , and the Zapotec do not make such a distinction meaningful . 

  Indeed the Us/ Them opposition itself , which Fipa perceive as one between Settlers and Strangers , is culturally " played down " in favour of the continuing process , by which as a deliberate matter of social and State policy , outsiders are incorporated into the society . 

  A related point of significance in several instances is the deliberate preference for avoidance rather than confrontation in situations perceived as threatening . 

  This is often accompanied by a self-presentation as " fearful " . 

  These characteristics are most manifest among the Chewong , Semai , Zapotec , Piaroa , and Buid . 

  Egalitarian social organization 

  In several of the societies discussed , institutionalized authority is minimal , and personal autonomy appears to be highly valued . 

  It is possible that this form of political organization is more conducive to non-competitive peaceful behaviour but , as many instances from New Guinea and Amazonia show , it is certainly no guarantee of it . 

  But in a highly stratified , caste-like society like Bali with a complex division of labour it is understandably difficult to maintain the Chewong-like idea of peaceful interaction between individuals . 

  The ideal and the actual conceptualization of Balinese personhood , as Howe describes it , certainly is one that centres round peace and calm . 

  However , there is a lack of fit between social order and cosmological system , and what are seen by less fortunate Balinese as gross inequalities of wealth and power serve as grounds for occasional breaches of the " peaceful " ethic . 

  In contrast with Bali , the Fipa as described by Willis provide an example of a hierarchical and centralized society that has successfully generalized a norm of peaceful interaction originating at the local community level . 

  Here a combination of favourable ecological and economic conditions , at a particular historical moment , appears to have made this achievement possible . 

  And here also gender differences are minimized . 

  Gender relations 

  When non-hierarchical , uncentralized societies -- like the four hunter-gatherer examples here described -- are divided internally on Us/ Them lines , it is often the case that gender differences define and establish social distinctions . 

  Such appears to be the case among the unstratified , yam-cultivating peoples of Papua New Guinea ( see Strathern , Godelier , etc . ) . 

  This is also the case among the Shavante , near-neighbours of the " peaceful " Piaroa . 

  In contrast , Piaroa minimize gender differences and maintain the same normative code of non-violent behaviour for both males and females . 

  Indeed , an interesting correlation has emerged in the field studies presented between " peacefulness " as a moral value and gender equality . 

  The Piaroa perception that male and female natures are essentially identical is shared by the Chewong , Semai , Buid , and Fipa . 

  This is an important point in the comparative study of ideology , and brings out the usefulness of focusing on ideas concerning human nature . 

  Most of the literature that deals with indigenous psychologies fails to take into account the possible variations in this respect between not only the sexes , but between other social categories such as chiefs and commoners . 

  Different characteristics and qualities may be attributed to different social categories of humans , accompanied perhaps by different moral demands , and proper account must be taken of these in the study of behaviour . 

  It is a perspective that Freeman in his criticism of Mead totally failed to appreciate , and one that might have reduced the savagery of his attack . 

  The gender perspective is one that could fruitfully be pursued further in anthropological studies on values in connection with social behaviour . 

  So far the information available is too small to draw any conclusions , but the correlations from the papers in this volume are suggestive and deserve further investigation on a comparative basis . 

  Cosmological charter 

  Many of the papers in this volume set the human agent within a cosmology , a total moral universe of meaning . 

  More particularly , there is a focus on indigenous ideas concerning human nature , and the psychological attributes associated with it , and behaviour is interpreted in terms of these ideas . 

  In many of the societies described it is found that the collective is emphasized rather than the individual . 

  This applies very clearly to the Zapotec , who , as O'Nell puts it , ask " not so much , " Who am I ? " , but " How am I a part of something ? " 

  " . But this is not invariably the case ; Robarchek , for example , sees a push for individual autonomy among the Semai and Overing similarly stresses the value of autonomy among the Piaroa . 

  What is common to all , however , is that an emphasis is placed on peaceful interaction among the members of the society , and this emphasis is cosmologically constructed and morally embedded in a cosmological universe of meaning . 

  CONCLUDING REMARKS 

  Within the overall acceptance of innate sociality in humans we have tried to shift the debate on human aggression or peacefulness away from definitions and absolute categories , to an investigation of alternative moral orders in which the human person is perceived of as radically different from that constructed through the Judaeo-Christian tradition . 

  Agreeing with Sahlins that " Culture is not ordered by the primitive emotions of the hypothalamus ; it is the emotions which are organized by culture " ( 1977 : 13 ) , we have presented some different social orders where fighting , competition , and other violent behaviour are not part of the order , or part of the people's ideas of what a human being is . 

  We hope we have contributed to the debate surrounding human aggression in a constructive and novel way ; and that we have raised some questions surrounding a number of basic notions that have remained unexamined by both the scientific and lay communities . 

  SYM 1989 Signe Howell and Roy Willis 

  REFERENCES 

  Part One 

  ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF SELF , EMOTIONS , AND BEHAVIOUR IN PEACEFUL SOCIETIES 

  1 

  Chapter One 

  HOBBESIAN AND ROUSSEAUAN IMAGES OF MAN : autonomy and individualism in a peaceful society 

  CLAYTON A. ROBARCHEK 

  Western social science theory seems to be perennially torn between two contradictory images of human sociability and of human nature : the Hobbesian war of each against all , and the idyllic existence of the Rousseauan noble savage . 

  The former image is particularly conspicuous in discussions of human aggression and violence , especially by ethologists , socio-biologists , and many psychoanalysts ( Paul 1978 ; Wilson 1978 ; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979 ; Freeman 1983 ) , while the latter image predominates in many accounts of peacefulness ( Benedict 1934 ; Nance 1975 ; Turnbull 1961 ; Thomas 1958 ) . 

  In keeping with the ethnographic focus of this book , my primary objective is to explore the psycho-cultural dynamics of non-violence in a specific society , the Semai Senoi of Malaysia . 

  Doing so , however , will challenge the modern counterparts of both the Hobbesian and Rousseauan views of human beings and human behaviour . 

  ( The facts that Rousseau never used the phrase " noble savage " , and that Hobbes has been widely misinterpreted are irrelevant here , since my concern is not with the conceptions that two seminal thinkers actually articulated , but is rather with the stereotyped dichotomous conceptions of human nature and human society that have come to be associated with their names . ) 

  These two images , however irreconcilable they may be on the surface , are , nonetheless , merely variants of a single conception of human beings and human behaviour , exemplars of a paradigm within which the character of human relations is seen not as growing out of human purposes and choices , but as determined by some natural state of human beings . 

  Both images ultimately deny the humanity of their subjects by maintaining the deterministic role of these predispositions , thereby reducing human beings to mechanically reactive automata . 

  The most commonly seen current formulations of this model alternatively emphasize either a maximizing human nature determined by biology , or a tabula rasa wholly tractable to the collective will of society , either the " selfish gene " , or the selfless primitive communist at one with the collective consciousness of his group . 

  The Semai Senoi , the ethnographic subjects of this paper and victims of purveyors of both images , seem to have suffered particularly in this regard . 

  Senoi peoples have been portrayed on the one hand as the quintessential noble savages by perpetrators of " Senoi Dream Theory " ( Stewart 1951 , 1954 ; Garfield 1974 ) and on the other as raging bloodthirsty killers by proponents of instinctive human aggression ( Paul 1978 ; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979 ; Wilson 1978 ) . 

  ( See Robarchek 1983 ; Dentan 1983 ; Domhoff 1985 for discussions of Senoi dream theory ; see Robarchek 1986b ; Robarchek and Dentan 1987 for a refutation of allegations of Semai bloodthirstiness . ) 

  One objective of this paper will be to transcend these human nature-based caricatures by examining the psycho-social dynamics of individualism and autonomy in Semai society , a society which is , in fact , virtually free of violence . 

  The approach taken here exemplifies what emerged in our discussions during the conference as a major theoretical orientation : a view of human action -- peacefulness or violence -- as the outcome of choices made by people actively in pursuit of particular purposes and goals , choices made and enacted within particular psychologically and culturally constituted realities which they themselves are actively constructing ( see Buckley , Howell , O'Nell , Overing , Gibson , Howe , Campbell , this volume ) . 

  Both in popular accounts and in much social science literature , the image of a peaceful society seems to carry with it a number of associated conceptions : co-operation , communalism , absence of self-interest , and so on . 

  In short , when we hear of a peaceful society , we are likely to envision a society that is somehow the antithesis of the self-absorbed individualism of the modern urban-industrial world . 

  This image seems to be as appealing to romantic capitalists as it is to millenarian marxists , both of whom see it as a sort of primitive grace from which the modern world has fallen ( e. g. Diamond 1972 ; Wolf 1981 ; Durdin 1972 ; MacLeish 1972 ; Montagu 1976 ) . 

  The implicit underlying assumption seems to be that non-violence and individualism are incompatible or , more likely , the converse : that individualism necessarily entails competitiveness , conflict , and , ultimately , violence . 

  While such logical consistency may be entailed in human nature-based conceptions of human relations , it is not , as we shall see , implied in a perspective that takes purposeful human actions in service of a variety of culturally defined ( and often contradictory ) goals as the primary fact of human relations . 

  The relative scarcity of ethnographic descriptions of peaceful societies has resulted in focusing a good deal of interest on those that do exist : Colin Turnbull's description of the Ituri Forest Pygmies ( 1961 ) , Elizabeth Marshall Thomas' characterization of the " harmless people " , the Kalahari Bushmen ( 1958 ) , Robert Dentan's description of the Semai as " non-violent people of Malaya " ( 1968 ) , Robert Levy's ethnography of the Tahitians ( 1973 ) , Jean Briggs' descriptions of the Inuit ( 1970 , 1975 ) , and Melford Spiro's accounts of life on Ifaluk ( 1950 , 1952 ) , being among the most notable . 

  While the primary ethnographic accounts of life and character in such peaceful societies usually present multi-dimensional pictures of complex human beings , these pictures tend to become more and more one-dimensional as the material is employed in secondary and tertiary works , where the original complexity is often reduced to little more than caricature . 

  That has certainly been the case with the Semai ethnographies . 

  The effects of observers' values and predispositions on their perceptions , descriptions , and analyses of ethnographic reality is , of course , an issue that has long been a matter of explicit concern to anthropologists . 

  The problem , in many cases , seems to lie less with the original ethnographic descriptions than with secondary and tertiary applications where these data are put into service in the construction of grand theoretical schemes . 

  In the tendency to portray non-violent peoples as lacking the egoism , selfishness , pettiness , and acquisitiveness so typical of the modern world , the issue is less one of distortion of the data , than of greater or lesser degrees of selectivity and emphasis in reporting and analysis . 

  I can see something of the sort as I look over my own published attempts to describe and account for the peaceful way of life followed by the Semai , and I think I can also see some of the reasons for it . 

  In these analyses , I have clearly stressed the affiliative , dependent , nurturant , accommodative , non-competitive aspects of Semai society , culture , and character over other aspects , because these seemed particularly relevant as factors in the complex psycho-cultural dynamic that contributes to the Semai abhorrence of overt conflict and violence . 

  I still feel that to be true . 

  Nonetheless , there is another side to Semai character , one involving a large measure of social and emotional isolation and jealously guarded personal autonomy . 

  While I have noted these before ( 1977a ) , I have not previously stressed their importance in Semai daily life and their place in the dynamic of non-violence . 

  ( It was my wife and ethnographic collaborator , Carole Robarchek , who , recognizing the importance of autonomy as a factor in her data on economic decision-making , suggested that it was perhaps time to address this imbalance . ) 

  THE AFFILIATIVE/ DEPENDENT SIDE OF SEMAI CHARACTER 

  This section briefly sketches some elements of a culturally constituted image of Semai reality , and the motivational context which it helps to define . 

  The discussion centres on two centrally important psychocultural themes -- dependency and danger -- as they interact in constituting the individual , social , and cultural contexts of action . 

  These themes infuse cultural beliefs and values , individual cognitive and affective orientations , and the institutional orders within which these are manifested . 

  As such , they comprise central components of the motivational context of Semai social relations -- the behavioural environment within which choices are made and actions undertaken . 

  This is a context where , as we shall see , affiliation and dependence are major social and psychological goals and where violence is not perceived as a legitimate behavioural , option . 

  Since I have described this context in detail elsewhere ( Robarchek 1977a , b ; 1986a ) , I will only sketch it here . 

  The themes of dependence and danger are ubiquitous in Semai life and are intricately intertwined . 

  Dependence , together with its reciprocal nurturance , is an important structural and emotional dimension in nearly all social relationships , both between human beings and between humans and the " spirit " helpers who have come to them in dreams to seek affiliation with the human world . 

  In the day-to-day world of human interactions , this is expressed most clearly in the symbolic equivalence of food and nurturance as manifested in the ethic and practice of food sharing . 

  The injunctions to share food and to avoid violence are the most important moral imperatives in Semai society and , as such , are constantly reiterated . 

  Nearly any public gathering , and certainly any meeting to resolve a dispute , will begin and end with statements by elders stressing the interdependence of the group , recalling past aid given and received by individuals , emphasizing that each is dependent on the others for survival , asserting that the band is really a group of siblings , and so on ( see Robarchek 1986a for discussion of additional cultural expressions of this complex ) . 

  Danger is likewise omnipresent ; virtually every entity and activity entails the possibility of illness , injury , and death . 

  In the human world , potential dangers range from the non-kinsmen and non-band members whose intentions can never be known with certainty , to the homicidal mai kahnoh kuui -- " the cutting-off-head-strangers " -- who are believed to lurk along forest paths to decapitate the unwary , selling the heads to lowland Malays for ritual purposes . 

  In the natural world , even the most objectively benign creatures , dragonflies and butterflies for example , can precipitate disaster , bringing thunderstorms with high winds , torrential rain , lightning , falling trees , and landslides . 

  The natural world is also populated with a vast array of mara " -- " they that kill us " -- the vast majority of which harbour malevolent intentions toward human beings . 

  These include tigers and other dangerous creatures that may or may not have material form at any given time , ghosts , as well as " spirits " -- the waterfall mara " that causes tuberculosis ; the tree mara " that kills a person's " soul " by breaking its neck , bringing sickness and death in a single day ; the hilltop mara " that twists and shrivels limbs , and so on . 

  Avoiding making these latent potentialities manifest is a constant concern , evidenced by the multitude of taboos that bracket even the most mundane activities in a ( usually vain ) attempt to forestall the dangers that lurk on all sides . 

  These two themes -- danger and dependence -- are inextricably interwoven in individual cognitive and affective orientations . 

  I have described the enculturation of these orientations elsewhere ( Robarchek 1977a , 1979a ) . 

  Suffice it to say here that , during enculturation , individuals acquire , first , an image of themselves as helpless and dependent in a hostile and malevolent world that it is largely beyond their ability to control and , second , a set of habits and expectations that lead them to seek and expect aid and comfort from others in times of distress . 

  These orientations are subsequently given cultural expression and concrete content in beliefs , such as those described above , in a vast number of malevolent situations , forces and beings , nearly all of which are actively bent upon the destruction of human beings . 

  In toto , these constitute an image of a world filled with dangers , human and non-human , known and unknown , which constantly menace from all sides , and against which the lone individual is helpless . 

  The only source of security , the sole refuge from this malevolent world , is in the kindred and the band , that tight little group of 100 or so other people with whom one's life is bound up from the cradle to the grave . 

  The subjective significance of this group is reflected in the paramount importance , noted above , of the values of nurturance and group affiliation . 

  This can also be seen in the responses to a series of sentence-completion test items directed toward eliciting cultural values . 

  Of 102 value-related statements elicited from nineteen individuals , only two were not clearly related to two core values of nurturance and affiliation . 

  " Goodness " was shown to be defined primarily in terms of nurturance ( generosity , helping , etc ) , and " badness " in terms of behaviours inimical to affiliation , especially fighting and anger ( see Robarchek 1986a ) . 

  Of major significance in the relationship of self-concept to non-violence is the fact that this value system and the ideals of self which it informs are shared by both men and women ( I owe the recognition of this significance to Joanna Overing's paper in this volume ) . 

  The male/ female distinction is not an important structural principle in Semai society : the sexual division of labour is clear , but not rigid ; there are no counterparts to the Mehinaku bachelor described by Gregor ( 1985 ) who goes hungry and cold rather than undertake the women's tasks of preparing manioc and hauling firewood ; to a Semai , such behaviour would simply be absurd . 

  Here , there are no strictly male or female tasks or roles ( there are even a few female " headmen " ) ; there are no purely male or female personality attributes ; there is no gender difference in access to ritual knowledge , no " men's clubs " or " men's houses " ; and there are no puberty rites or other rites of passage defining differential ideals of manhood and womanhood . 

  In short , and unlike most societies , there is no separate cultural ideal of womanhood against which an aggressive ideal of manhood might be cast in structural opposition . 

  What all of this shows is an image of a world fraught with dangers that are beyond the control of any human being , a world where the only refuge is in the protection and nurturance of kin and community . 

  Without this , a person is completely at the mercy of the dangers that menace from without . 

  The perceived importance of this refuge can be seen in another of the sentence-completion test responses . 

  To the item " More than anything else he/ she is afraid of " , the model response , more frequent than " tigers " , " spirits " , or " death " combined ( all of which were cited ) , was " becoming embroiled in a dispute " . 

  Becoming so embroiled strains the relations with kin and co-villagers , threatening the only bulwark against the malevolence of the world outside . 

  In a world so construed , and a motivational context so defined , it is clear why violence is not perceived as an acceptable behavioural option in interpersonal relations . 

  ( Howell , in this volume , describes a similarly non-violent orientation among the closely related Chewong , but one apparently built on a much less fearful world view . ) 

  The ubiquitous expression of dependence and nurturance through the essentially mandatory giving and receiving of food does not , contrary to what might be expected , significantly constrain individual autonomy , at least in part because " balanced " reciprocity ( Sahlins 1972 ) , involving the accounting of gifts and the expectation of equivalent return , is neither expected nor , in fact , permitted within the community . 

  The Semai ethic of sharing mandates that aid be given when it is needed ( with the expectation , to be sure , that it will be reciprocated by someone at some later date when the giver is in need ) , but any accounting or direct reciprocation is unacceptable . 

  This was made very clear to me early in my fieldwork when I offended a neighbour by trying to make explicit return of food that had been given to my wife and me . 

  Accepting help thus does not entail an accumulation of debt nor does it imply subordination , and is not a route to subjugation . 

  Nor is sharing or giving help a route to dominance ; it is merely what is expected , part of the minimal definition of what it is to be a member of a Semai community ( see Robarchek 1986a ; see Dentan 1968 : 134 for a discussion of implications of the distinction between reciprocity and sharing ) . 

  ENCULTURATION OF AUTONOMY 

  From an early age , the autonomy of the will of the individual is culturally affirmed . 

  No child can be forced to do anything he or she does not wish to do . 

  The most respected elder in the community may order a child to fetch something , but if the child refuses , that is the end of the matter ( see Dentan 1968 : 59 ) . 

  This even extends to forbidding children to do things that are positively dangerous : playing with sharp knives , climbing tall trees , and so on . 

  Parents may order children not to do these things , but such orders have little effect and no punishment is forthcoming if they are disobeyed . 

  From infancy through early adolescence , Semai children are largely unconstrained and free of external domination . 

  This is somewhat less the case for girls , who are expected to help their mothers with child care and other household chores , than for boys , of whom very little is expected . 

  None the less , both sexes spend much of their time in pairs or small groups , doing largely as they please : playing , fishing , catching butterflies for sale to traders , and so on . 

  Although schools are becoming more accessible to more and more Semai communities , children often attend only sporadically , simply refusing when it suits them . 

  Similarly , medicine , and especially inoculations and hospitalization , can not be forced on anyone . 

  If a small child rejects medicine dispensed by one of the medical posts scattered throughout the region , parents will not persist in the face of the child's refusal ( see Robarchek 1980 ) . 

  Children are taught to share , are encouraged to contribute to the household , and are praised when they do so , but little real social pressure is brought to bear until adolescence . 

  Even then , this is likely to be little more than an insistence that they begin to make some regular contribution to the household in the form of dried fish , tobacco , and so on . 

  Finally , sexual experimentation , which begins at an early age , is entirely free from adult concern or interference . 

  Only with marriage are young people expected to put aside the freedom of childhood and assume adult responsibilities , and it is often several years after marriage before young people ( especially young men ) finally settle into domesticity . 

  Long before this , however , the groundwork has been well laid for a sense of personal autonomy that is not in conflict with attitudes of dependency ( since assistance is simply to be expected and does not , as we have seen , entail subordination ) and that persists throughout life . 

  CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS OF AUTONOMY 

  Several concepts reinforce and give explicit cultural expression to this sense of individual autonomy ; especially significant in this regard are the concepts of pehunan and segat . 

  pehunan refers to a state of extreme vulnerability to dangers of all sorts that results from the frustration of an individual's wishes ( see Dentan 1968 ; Robarchek 1977b , 1986b ) . 

  While such a state most frequently results from the frustration of a person's expressed desire for some material object , especially food or tobacco , Dentan ( 1968 ) notes that it can also be the result of forcing someone to do something against his or her will . 

  Thus attempting to coerce a person into doing something he or she does not want to do -- i. e. infringing on the person's autonomy -- places that individual in increased peril of illness , injury , attack by wild animals or malevolent " spirits " , or any of the other innumerable dangers that menace constantly . 

  Moreover , the person responsible for inducing this state is likely to be held at least partially liable if misfortune does occur . 

  Thus , while this concept and associated beliefs are central to Semai attitudes of dependency ( by entailing the responsibility of the group to nurture the individual by satisfying his needs , see Robarchek 1986b ) , it also buttresses the sense of individuality by giving a privileged position to individuals' wishes and motives . 

  This privileged position of an individual's wishes over the wishes of others also finds its expression in the concept of segat . 

  The term is obviously cognate with the Malay " segan " : " reluctant " or " shy " ( Dentan 1968 ) ; however , the Semai meaning is rather more complex . 

  It labels an attitude that can be roughly glossed as " do not feel like it " ( see Dentan 1968 ) . 

  The word is most often heard in response to an order to do something : fetch firewood , haul water , etc . 

  The response , " nye " , egng ng segat " ( " no , I do not feel like it " ) is its own justification , requires no further elaboration , and is generally final . 

  Segat is also frequently used to " explain " why one has chosen not to do something , collect rattan for sale , for example , or attend a curing seance : " Egng ng segat ci'niib " ( " I do not feel like walking [ that far ] " ) . 

  Once again , no further explanation is deemed necessary . 

  Too frequent reliance on segat to avoid one's responsibilities would , of course , eventually bring social pressure to bear : gossip , scolding , shaming , and so on . 

  On any given occasion , however , the contravention of one's own desires is sufficient justification for refusal to comply with the wishes of others . 

  The resistance to being coerced has a variety of more or less typical expressions , shaped by other values and ideals . 

  Dentan , for example , describes the Semai concept of persusah -- to make difficulty or unhappiness for someone by meddling in his affairs -- and notes that the prescribed response to such interference is withdrawal or passivity ( 1968 : 63 ) . 

  A typical instance can be seen when one person attempts to persuade another to do something that the latter does not want to do , or to tell him something that he does not want to hear . 

  The paramount value which Semai place on avoidance of conflict or confrontation precludes a direct response , so a strategy of passive resistance is adopted : the person who is being importuned begins , without responding directly , to turn slowly , almost imperceptibly , around , until the one who is importuning him is speaking to his back . 

  ( Briggs ( 1970 : 59-60 ) describes a similar value on autonomy and resistance to its infringement among the Inuit . ) 

  One of the consequences of this reluctance to surrender autonomy is an extreme difficulty in organizing any collective action unless everyone can be convinced that it is in his or her best interest . 

  In more than two years of living with one band of Semai , my wife and I witnessed only two instances of large-scale co-operative action , one of which I had to organize myself to mobilize a labour force to repair a dangerously deteriorated suspension bridge which nearly everyone in the band used every day , and which was literally on the verge of collapse . 

  The other involved the building of a fence to keep goats owned by members of one hamlet from ravaging the swiddens of another hamlet of the same band . 

  Both projects , but especially the latter , required numerous meetings and much cajoling . 

  In the case of the fence , those whose swiddens were being devoured argued that it was the responsibility of the goat owners to contain their animals ; the goat owners held that the swidden owners should contribute to the protection of their own gardens . 

  Some semblance of co-operation was finally attained only on the grounds that it was everyone's responsibility to protect the band from the internal dissension and strife which the affair was creating . 

  On numerous other occasions I saw attempts to mobilize band-wide agreement or co-operation fail utterly when faced with the passive but intractable opposition of individuals to yielding their freedom of action to group consensus . 

  The other side of this culturally defined autonomy is a sense of separateness , of isolation , that has both psychological and sociocultural components and consequences . 

  I have described elsewhere the truncation of strong affective ties that occurs in childhood and the emotional estrangement this engenders ( Robarchek 1977a ) . 

  Dentan cites an informant who asked rhetorically " what good does it do an unhappy person to have another person upset ? " ( 1968 : 64 ) . 

  This attitude can , for example , be seen in a limited expression of empathy ( teenage boys and girls laughing and joking together as they help relatives of a dead baby dig a grave , for example ) . 

  None of this , however , should be interpreted as implying that Semai are callous or indifferent to the welfare of their neighbours and kin , which is certainly not the case ; it merely demonstrates that another person's problems and affairs are pre-eminently his own ; " hal mai , hal mai ; hal hii " , hal hii' " is the apposite aphorism : " their affairs are theirs ; our affairs are ours . " 

  This non-identification with the feelings of others is linked to a perceived impossibility of knowing the thoughts of others as well . 

  I recall , while discussing with a neighbour the psychiatric disorder of a co-villager , asking " Is his thinking confused ? " 

  Although , on reflection , that was an exceedingly dumb question , my neighbour's response was , none the less , informative . 

  He looked at me with a sense of utter incredulity and answered : " I do not know how he thinks . " 

  ( Most Westerners would , I think , have little difficulty in assuming that they could infer confused thinking from the observation of confused speech and behaviour . ) 

  This same attitude can also be seen in the exasperating , but typical , response that we received whenever we questioned a third party's motives for doing something : " Oh , sara " li kaa' " -- roughly : " Oh , it's his business . " 

  Emotional isolation is also manifested in a rather high level of insecurity in the relationships between husbands and wives . 

  This insecurity , along with a felt need for some stable focus of emotional security , can be seen in responses to the sentence-completion test item " more than anything else he/ she worries about ... " 

  The modal response was " rejection by his/ her spouse " . 

  The genuine vulnerability of the marriage relationship can be seen in , the high frequency of adultery and divorce that is typical of Semai communities . 

  This should not , however , be taken to imply that extra-marital affairs are taken lightly . 

  Quite the contrary ; the emotions engendered by such rejection can overwhelm a person's coping resources , sometimes leading to suicide . 

  ( See Levy ( 1973 ) who saw , in Tahiti , an association between a desire for a measure of interdependence and autonomy , a certain degree of emotional remoteness from others , and a resistance to dependence . ) 

  The subjective threat perceived in rejection by a spouse or lawyer is given cultural expression and concrete content in the concept of sasoo , which refers to a malevolent mara " called a " sasoo woman " or " sasoo man " , that may attack the rejected party . 

  Assuming the form of the lost love , the spirit comes in a dream to sexually possess the abandoned one . 

  Persons so possessed lose their senses , periodically or permanently , withdraw from contact with others , and may wander off into the forest , perhaps never to return . 

  The longer one is so possessed , the more difficult it is to exorcise the sasoo spirit , since , " like a real spouse " , it merges with the very flesh and bone of the victim . 

  Such possession is , in fact , the primary explanation for actual instances of psychiatric disorder in the community where my wife and I worked ( see Robarchek 1977b ) . 

  In sum , alongside group orientation and dependence , individualism and autonomy are significant components in the psycho-cultural dynamics of life in a Semai community and are given explicit cultural expression in notions such as pehunan and segat . 

  Social implications include a resistance to co-operative activities growing out of a reluctance to surrender one's freedom of action or to subordinate one's wishes to the will of others . 

  Psychologically , the dark side of this individualism entails an emotional remoteness from others which can be seen in the limited expression of empathy and in the fragility and insecurity of many marriage relationships . 

  The intense threat of further isolation is given cultural formulation in the concept of sasoo possession , and individual expression in withdrawal and even suicide . 

  CONCLUSION 

  I have attempted , in this paper , to sketch the background of human interaction in a particular milieu , to describe some aspects of a behavioural environment within which people organize their lives in pursuit of particular goals . 

  More specifically , I have attempted to trace some of the interrelationships among several " orientations " or " themes " in Semai life -- dependence and nurturance , danger , individualism , and autonomy -- that interact in constituting , socially , psychologically , and culturally , a reality where individuals are , on the one hand , at risk of being alone in an unremittingly hostile world and , on the other , tightly enclosed in a network of kin and co-villagers upon whom each is dependent for his very survival . 

  In such a situation , individualism and affiliation , autonomy and dependency , are not social or psychological opposite poles on a Hobbesian-Rousseauan dichotomy but , rather , mutually reinforce one another in defining a particular phenomenal reality . 

  Expressed in behaviour , the result is neither the self-obsessed maximizing of Adam Smith and E. O. Wilson , nor the self-abnegating communalism of Marx and Engels . 

  Rather , a context of action is defined where autonomy continues to be valued and guarded , but where the paramount cultural values stress generosity and affiliation , and where kindred and community , protected by these values , remain the sole sources of nurturance and security . 

  In a world so defined , peacefulness does not require suppression of individuality and renunciation of autonomy ; it is simply the only sensible way for people to behave , and it has , for Semai , become a crucial part of a definition of self and a positive goal in its own right . 

  SYM 1989 Clayton A. Robarchek 

  REFERENCES 

  2 

  Chapter Two 

  " TO BE ANGRY IS NOT TO BE HUMAN , BUT TO BE FEARFUL IS " : Chewong concepts of human nature 

  SIGNE HOWELL 

  INTRODUCTION 

  In this paper I shall consider an alternative theory of human nature , that of the Chewong of Peninsular Malaysia which , I shall argue , is closely linked with the " peaceful way of life " . 

  My argument is that ideology is also a moral system , and that moral values must be directly related to ideas of human nature : what it is to be a person . 

  An integral part of any theory of personhood concerns inner states of all kinds , and I shall be centring my discussion on indigenous ideas relating to some inner states important to the Chewong , an understanding of which , I shall argue , is necessary in order to understand their interpersonal behaviour and associated values . 

  Such an approach is in keeping with the guidelines for the original conference , which stressed the interpretative importance of indigenous concepts of self . 

  To avoid becoming embroiled in psychological or philosophical debates concerning selfhood , most of which are individually oriented as well as universalistic in their conclusions , I prefer to use alternative expressions ; either concept of personhood , or concept of human nature . 

  The Chewong are a hunter-gatherer , shifting cultivating group of people who live in the tropical rain forest of the Malay Peninsula . 

  Linguistically and culturally they are related to the Semai about whom Robarchek is writing in this volume . 

  The Malaysian aboriginals are usually classified as non-violent , non-aggressive , peaceful etc. , as well as non-hierarchical ( see Dentan 1976 , 1978 ; Robarchek 1977 , 1979 ; Robarchek and Dentan 1987 ; Howell 1981 , 1984 , 1988 ) . 

  The problem lies in how to account for this , to the Western observer , astonishing phenomenon . 

  HUMAN NATURE ACCORDING TO CHEWONG PHILOSOPHY 

  By human nature , I here mean Chewong nature : what it means to be a Chewong human being . 

  As is commonly found in small-scale societies , the definition of humanity excludes all but the we-group . 

  The we-group of the Chewong , however , extends into the domains of non-human beings , that is , it includes all those things in the environment such as trees , stones , rivers , mountains , which are supposed to have consciousness -- and thus in Chewong parlance are " people " ( beri ) , as well as the large number of beings who are said to exist , but who are invisible to the ordinary eye . 

  They are all " people " with identical person attributes to the Chewong . 

  In order to understand the guiding ideas of the Chewong moral universe , it is necessary to examine the ordinary human beings in relationship with this large world of non-human or superhuman beings . 

  I have argued elsewhere ( 1984 ) that Chewong society is co-existent with their universe , and for this reason ideas concerning all categories of conscious beings must be taken into account when establishing indigenous person attributes . 

  A healthy , rational , and fully functioning person is one whose being is in balance . 

  This means that the body ; the " soul " ( ruwai ) -- the main indicator of consciousness and rationality ; the liver -- seat of inner states of all kinds and reference point for personality ; the smell -- an integral and unique part of the individual ; and the eyes -- the medium which allows one to perceive reality in conformity with those of one's own species , are all present and in the correct state . 

  In addition , certain specific characteristics associated with the liver ( shy and fearful ) are also required , while others ( angry , quarrelsome , brave ) are definitely not part of the Chewong person . 

  These will be discussed in detail below . 

  It is important to stress that the Chewong do not conceptualise specifically male characteristics as opposed to female ones . 

  Unlike many other societies , including our own , Chewong ideas about human nature are truly applicable to both sexes . 

  This is particularly clear in childrearing practices where boys and girls are treated identically , and are expected to develop similar person characteristics . 

  While the Chewong are fully aware of the physiological differences between the sexes , these are not valued relative to each other , nor do they constitute any base for symbolic ordering ( see Howell 1983 , 1988 for further discussion on Chewong gender ) . 

  Another aspect of humanness is an egalitarian social order . 

  Thus neither the Chewong nor any of the superhuman beings are organized in a hierarchical ranking system . 

  They are explicit on this point . 

  Social stratification with a chief at the top is part of the outside world , not theirs . 

  Ideas of health and disease are integrally linked to personhood ideas , and it is therefore important to consider these . 

  To the Chewong , disease is always explained in terms of one of the above-mentioned attributes being upset in some way , usually through the interference of a non-human being . 

  When an illness occurs , those who are knowledgeable in such matters proffer a diagnosis . 

  This means trying to identify which kind of being might be responsible , based on evidence from the patient's recent behaviour ( this includes improper experiencing and/ or expressing of emotionality ; see Howell 1981 , 1984 for a more detailed discussion ) . 

  Once this is done , healing is attempted . 

  This may be done by spells directed at the harmful being , hoping to negate its influence , or by the performance of a large-scale shamanistic seance in which those who have spirit guides send their " souls " ( ruwai ) out into the worlds of the various non-human beings looking for the one responsible . 

  The most serious forms of illness are those where the patient's ruwai or smell has been taken by one of these beings . 

  In such cases , it is of utmost importance to retrieve it lest the patient dies . 

  To assist the healing process , humans need the co-operation of others . 

  Anything or anyone non-human may become the spirit guide of an individual human . 

  The relationship is initiated by an encounter when the object or being reveals itself as " people " ( beri ) -- a person with consciousness -- in a dream , trance , or during a waking state in the jungle . 

  During a seance , humans request their spirit guides to come and to help them . 

  Various preparations must be made to entice them . 

  Spirit guides , regardless of what kind , are always described as extremely timid . 

  The slightest disturbance makes them retreat in fear ( I shall return to this point below ) . 

  The most common species of spirit guide , and those most loved by the Chewong , are the so-called " leaf-people " . 

  They are beings who live in plants , trees , and flowers . 

  There is a perceived identity in looks and dress between Chewong and the leaf-people -- and , as I shall show , in their personalities . 

  The other main kind of beings with whom the Chewong claim close affinity is the " original people " who live on Earth Six , above the human Earth Seven . 

  These beings used to live on Earth Seven a long time ago , but they retreated to Earth Six because it was too hot and too dirty here . 

  They are immortal because of the cool temperature on Earth Six and because they eat nothing but fruit , a cooling food . 

  The Chewong are mortal because the reverse conditions prevail on their earth . 

  The jungle is hot , and they eat meat , a food which is hot and dirty because of the blood content . 

  The leaf-people are also cool , their food being the morning dew and the cool incense smoke offered them by the Chewong . 

  What about the rest of the superhuman beings in the Chewong universe ? 

  There is a vast number of these , and they fall into several distinct kinds . 

  However , the broadest distinction being made , and one which is of most relevance in the present context , is that between the " good " ( baig ) and the " bad " ( yabud ) -- or , as I prefer , the helpful and the harmful , designations which have less of Western moral connotations and which in the particular context correspond more closely to Chewong associations . 

  Related attributes are beautiful and generous , and ugly and stingy respectively . 

  These are directly congruent with the beings' activities : whether they cause harm , in the form of disease and mishap , or whether they help to set things right following such a damaging occurrence . 

  There are many different beings in the Chewong universe who may inflict harm upon them . 

  With the possible exception of only two -- Tanko , who causes the thunder and lightning , and a group of beings known collectively as keoi ( or nlab ) , beings who are transformed humans but who have lost their humanness completely -- none of them is portrayed as evil , malicious , or in any way seeking to harm humans . 

  Rather , their intentions and activities are perceived as identical to those of humans : to feed themselves and to prevent or overcome mishaps . 

  One major distinguishing feature between all conscious beings is the eyes . 

  The actual constitution of the eyes is different in all species . 

  This means that they all perceive the world in slightly different ways . 

  All beings who live on Earth Seven -- with the exception of the leaf-people -- are carnivorous . 

  What constitutes their meat , however , differs and this is linked to their perceptions of the environment . 

  Thus the Chewong see a wild pig , or any other animal normally hunted , primarily as potential meat and they set about trying to catch it . 

  Similarly , the harmful beings see meat when they look upon the human body , the human " soul " ( ruwai ) , or human smell , and they will also set about trying to catch these . 

  Just like humans , they go hunting with their blowpipes and they erect snares and traps in the jungle . 

  The Chewong do not perceive these activities as expressing any anger or aggressive feelings , however , even when they themselves are the victims . 

  Rather , they explain it in terms of each species behaving according to its " nature " . 

  In this regard they make no distinction between animals and superhumans . 

  Dangerous animals do not attack unless an individual has made this possible through his or her incorrect behaviour . 

  I shall return to this below . 

  INNER STATES AND THEIR RELATIVE VALUE 

  I now wish to look at some Chewong words that pertain to inner states and relate these to ideas of what it means to be human . 

  I have examined this vocabulary elsewhere ( 1981 ) and will here confine myself to noting that the range and elaboration of emotional and mental terms is relatively limited . 

  People are not concerned with discussing their emotional states ; emotionality in most instances is negatively valued . 

  However , a few such are heavily elaborated culturally , and I propose that an examination of these is one means by which we might achieve an understanding of Chewong " peacefulness " . 

  I shall look at five indigenous concepts which I think throw some light on the particularity of Chewong social and individual behaviour . 

  Two are highly valued , namely lidya ( shy , timid , ashamed ) and hntugen ( frightened , fearful ) , and can be said to be integral aspects of the Chewong person ( Howell 1988 ) . 

  The other three are subject to severe cultural condemnation and can be said to represent the non-Chewong person , by which I mean people outside the wider social universe of humans and superhumans , in effect Malays and Chinese . 

  These are chan ( angry ) , oklahi ( quarrelsome ) , and , of a somewhat different but related order , berani ( brave , daring ) . 

  Shy and fearful 

  The Chewong learn to fear as very young children . 

  Adults take great delight in frightening them by invoking unexperienced horrors , such as being confronted by a Malay or a tiger . 

  Parents speak approvingly of their timid children , and adults are constantly at great pains to convince others of their own fearfulness . 

  Similarly , shyness is constantly invoked as a legitimate reason for failure to do something . 

  There is no ambiguity about the value of these characteristics . 

  They are integral parts of the Chewong concept of human nature -- and valued ones at that . 

  However , it is important to stress that the Chewong mainly fear the unknown , or the uncontrollable . 

  The jungle presents no terror to them . 

  They know how to behave properly in it , thereby avoiding danger ( for a contrasted view of Malaysian aboriginals' attitude to their jungle environment , see Robarchek , this volume ) . 

  It is interesting to examine various superhuman beings and determine which of them are presented as inherently shy and fearful . 

  Whenever confronted with perceived danger the leaf-people and the original people flee . 

  This is of course the way the Chewong themselves react under similar circumstances . 

  To flee from danger is the explicit mechanism of Chewong defence . 

  There are numerous incidents to exemplify this . 

  They fled from the marauding Malays of earlier times ; they flee from the approach of any stranger today ; they flee from any imagined threatening event or confrontation . 

  Such immediate and terror-filled reaction is a constant topic of conversation , just as is the fearfulness of the leaf-people and the original people . 

  While sharing many similarities , the relationship between humans and the original people , and humans and the leaf-people , is not identical . 

  The original people are ancestors of the Chewong in so far as they represent the mythical past , but not in the sense that they are transformed dead of today . 

  The leaf-people are not linked to humans in such a direct way , but structurally the relationships are analogous . 

  These two categories of superhuman beings occupy a very special place in Chewong philosophy ; they are both -- in their different ways -- the alter ego of humans . 

  It is interesting therefore to note that the chief emotional and behavioural characteristic of them both is timidity , fearfulness , and retreat in the face of perceived danger . 

  None of the other superhuman beings is described as inherently shy or fearful , a further indication of their being conceptually set apart from human beings . 

  However , we can not posit an opposition in terms of fearful , helpful , and good beings versus brave , aggressive , harmful beings . 

  There is a set of rules which inform and direct human behaviour , and the transgression of any of these usually leads to some form of superhuman intervention in the form of illness and mishap . 

  None of the superhuman beings -- with the exception of the two already mentioned -- can thus interfere with a human being unless a rule has been broken . 

  So with regard to these beings , the Chewong know that they are vulnerable to attack , but that if they take proper care in their day-to-day behaviour and avoid places where potentially harmful beings are known to live and set their traps , they have a fairly good chance of being healthy and fit . 

  The important point is that none of these beings is referred to as evil , nor their harmful acts as aggressive or violent . 

  They are just carrying out their life in accordance with the rules given them , as all " people " including Chewong do . 

  The potentially harmful beings may be described by the adjective yabud ( bad , harmful , ugly ) , but whenever thus designated , the speaker will invariably qualify this by saying that they are not " truly bad " because they only cause harm if a person breaks a rule , or inadvertently falls into a trap . 

  Contrary to influential theories in primatology and ethology , hunting among the Chewong can not be described as an aggressive or violent activity ( see the Introduction , this volume , for discussion of problems in connection with the definition of these terms ) . 

  Hunters do not portray the hunt in ways that could be construed as aggressive , either in the hunter's emotional state or in his attitude to the prey . 

  The various non-human beings who hunt humans are not portrayed as violent or aggressive either . 

  Everyone , visible and invisible , has to eat according to Chewong notions of the world order . 

  Part of the diet is meat , and to many the human body , soul , and smell constitute meat . 

  If someone catches a human soul or throws their spear into a human body thereby causing illness to the victim , then this is either plain bad luck or the direct result of some transgression which permits the animal/ being to attack . 

  Humans must diagnose who has done the deed and try to rectify it . 

  The point is that hunting , whether performed by humans , animals , or superhuman beings , is not an activity associated by the Chewong with any aroused inner state . 

  It is not a violent act ; it is not conceptualized as an attack . 

  The words used make this clear . 

  There are numerous words for the hunting activity , mainly dependent upon the object of the hunt or the tools employed , but none corresponds to words denoting violent acts . 

  Of course there are several such words , for the Chewong are not ignorant of other modes of behaviour than those practised by themselves . 

  They have in their language , and frequently use , Malay imported words for attack , fight , war , to quarrel , and to be angry . 

  However , there appear to be no words for compete or coerce . 

  It is an interesting feature of Chewong social relations that no competitive games are played , either between adults or children . 

  Hunting is not an occasion for male striving after status . 

  On the contrary , the Chewong in hunting as in other matters tend to ignore or negate any demonstration of individual superior skill . 

  While to some extent the harmful and the helpful beings in the Chewong universe can be thought of as opposed , they do not fall into neatly discernible complementary categories . 

  A previously harmful being may change and become a helpful spirit guide to an individual , at which point it will also become circumspect , if not fearful , in its relationship with humans . 

  However , the leaf people and the original people alone are described automatically as shy and fearful . 

  Only these two kinds of helpful people are unequivocally desirable spirit guides . 

  The Chewong wish for their attendance and assistance . 

  Ideally , they do not wish for any interaction at all with the other kinds of superhuman beings . 

  The myths which describe encounters with superhuman beings of all kinds never describe the various harmful ones as shy or fearful , whereas they always do with respect to the helpful . 

  The two beings who unanimously are characterized as not fearful are Tanko and keoi . 

  Tanko is a very complex character ( see Howell 1984 ) , but in several of his aspects , Tanko is described as deceitful . 

  He is portrayed as having a voracious sexual appetite . 

  He tricks young girls into having sexual intercourse with him , and he steals children whom he gives as food to his dogs . 

  He is untrustworthy , pretending to be something pleasant when he has harmful designs . 

  This is also the case with the group of beings called keoi . 

  Keoi look like ordinary human individuals -- men and women -- and in fact they were this at some time , but they performed a forbidden act which transformed them into keoi . 

  As keoi their eyes are completely different , and they see other humans as potential meat and set about catching them . 

  But their hunting is qualitatively different to that of other species -- animal or superhuman . 

  While living amongst their intended victims they brazenly plot to catch them , all the while lying and playing tricks . 

  In the myths both Tanko and keoi take the wildest risks to achieve their ends . 

  They are explicitly said not to be fearful . 

  As such , humans fear them , and as such , they are firmly set apart from the Chewong . 

  Interestingly , keoi are the only beings the Chewong may kill . 

  This can be explained , I think , in terms of the former Chewong status of these beings . 

  Through their wholly unacceptable behaviour , keoi mark themselves apart from humans , while reminding them of the possibility of such behaviour . 

  In conformity with their special status , keoi can not be killed with ordinary weapons , but only with fire . 

  Brave , angry , and quarrelsome 

  If we examine an inner state/ behavioural model possibly opposed to that of shy and fearful , namely brave , we find that this is not a characteristic the Chewong associate with themselves . 

  The word they use for this ( berani ) is Malay but , more commonly , they simply negate the word fearful . 

  An example of what it means to be brave ( or not fearful ) was provided by myself . 

  I had left my mother and father and husband to go alone to a place which was completely unknown to me in order to live with people who were equally unknown . 

  Every Chewong , man and woman , insisted that they would never be able to do such a thing , they would be much too frightened . 

  " What if we had been bad people ? " they kept asking . 

  Their image of non-Chewong is that they are " bad " ( yabud ) -- they can not be trusted not to harm one . 

  This attitude explains the general terror that my arrival provoked . 

  Outsiders , in their experience mainly Malays and Chinese , are portrayed as thieves and cheaters who will not stop at physical violence . 

  The meaning of yabud in this instance is therefore qualitatively different from that used in the context of harmful superhumans . 

  Malays and Chinese are bad . 

  They are also fearless . 

  Of course they are not part of the Chewong wider social universe of humans and superhumans , and hence they , fall outside their moral universe . 

  There are no shared " rules " governing their relationship which enable individuals to avoid dangers through correct behaviour . 

  Ideologically speaking , the Malays and Chinese are not human . 

  There were numerous adults , mainly women but also some men , who had never left the jungle to visit the nearby Malay villages or Chinese trading station . 

  They declared they were much too frightened . 

  Even those who went regularly , and who spoke Malay fairly fluently , were always tense and on the look-out for danger . 

  Stories of alleged atrocities performed by Malays or Chinese were frequently brought back . 

  When hearing such tales those in the jungle would become quite terrified , and I once met a group of Chewong on the move with all their worldly belongings , having abandoned their settlement in order to resettle much deeper in the jungle because they had heard rumours that the Malays wanted Chewong heads . 

  Fleeing has always been the Chewong response to violence . 

  To remain and confront the aggressors is not a viable alternative . 

  " No , no , we are not brave , we are very frightened " , was the inevitable response when I asked why they always fled . 

  This was not a matter of excuse , but a statement of fact . 

  To be brave is not desirable . 

  I suggest that if this were not so , the conceptual link between humans and the leaf and original peoples would be severed . 

  Another emotion which is somewhat elaborated upon by the Chewong is that expressed by the word chan which I translate as anger or angry . 

  What are the circumstances in which they use this word and what are their attitudes to a person thus described ? 

  While it is recognized that anyone might experience anger at some time , and engage in a quarrel , most would not admit to having done so . 

  I never witnessed a serious quarrel or observed anyone I would describe as angry . 

  This , of course , does not mean that the Chewong think the same ; their standards are very different from mine in this regard . 

  Very occasionally a small child would throw a tantrum when denied something , and it would be described as chan . 

  Adults ignored such outbursts as much as possible , occasionally shouting at the child to stop . 

  They offered no theory as to why the child behaved in such a way , no external event was allowed an explanatory status ; rather the outburst was reflected back to the personality of the child , who was said to have a very angry liver ( the liver being the seat of inner states ) . 

  When adults get upset about someone's behaviour , they tend not to confront the protagonist , but withdraw into themselves . 

  A frequent cause is marital infidelity . 

  The injured parties say that their livers are " not good " ( we would say we were feeling depressed ) , they " miss their spouse " . 

  It was my experience that they took an extremely passive line , waiting to see if the situation would change and the spouse return . 

  Alternatively , an illness may befall the injured party . 

  The adulterer is the cause of this in so far as his/ her act has allowed a superhuman being to attack the spouse . 

  Illness is thus one way of coping with jealousy . 

  The sick person would not be described as chan in such instances , although the cause would be identified as directly related to the behaviour of the spouse . 

  Alternatively , it is possible to take a retaliatory line and attack the errant spouse , either verbally -- the most common form -- or by attacking his/ her things ; never their person . 

  For instance , one woman who was described by all as extremely jealous of her husband ( he was said to be innocent ) had an angry liver , and she was always quarrelling . 

  Thus she not only shouted at him , she once took his best blowpipe , broke it in two and stamped on it . 

  This was a most amazing act ; the Chewong continued to talk about it for weeks . 

  Everyone was extremely upset and disturbed by her . 

  Institutionally , there are no mechanisms for punishing someone for deviant behaviour of any kind . 

  This woman did behave antisocially . 

  Several families who lived in the same settlement decided to leave as a result of her behaviour , and others insisted that they would never go to live in the same place as her . 

  But such an occurrence of anger was extremely rare . 

  When I cited instances when I thought anger might have been appropriate , I was always told " this is not our way " . 

  So again , we find that Chewong reaction to perceived violence -- which is how I would describe the abuse of the jealous woman -- is to retreat from it . 

  Anger is ignored as much as possible , as with angry children , but when it becomes too manifest , people physically remove themselves , just as they flee from outsiders . 

  Those Chewong who behave in unacceptable ways can not be confronted directly . 

  This is the case with all deviant social behaviour , such as incorrect marriages or theft . 

  In such instances the culprit would normally leave , but never at an explicit request . 

  More violent crimes than that performed by the jealous woman did not occur among the Chewong while I was with them , nor could anyone tell me of others in the past . 

  Their mythology has no instances of human physical violence . 

  I asked about murder . 

  They insisted it never happened . 

  When I pressed them to imagine the result of such an event , they replied the murderer would be so ashamed ( lidya ) that she/ he would leave the region altogether never to return ; again withdrawal . 

  The host of different beings attributed with consciousness that exist within the Chewong universe have structurally similar qualities to humans . 

  With the possible exception of Tanko and keoi , none is perceived as hierarchical , aggressive , competitive , quarrelsome , angry , or domineering . 

  Neither are they brave . 

  Humans and the rest of the conscious non-humans are shy and fearful . 

  Of these , semantically and ideologically the leaf-people and the original people stand closest to the Chewong , while Tanko and keoi stand closest to the outsiders . 

  On the whole , the terms bad , brave , quarrelsome , and angry are associated with outsiders , not with the Chewong or the various superhuman beings who participate in the wider Chewong social universe . 

  The Malays and Chinese represent the prototypes of these characteristics . 

  They are therefore to be feared and avoided . 

  There is very little the Chewong can do to prevent the Chinese and Malays from harming them , except to stay out of their way as much as possible . 

  Not being part of the Chewong social universe , they operate according to different rules but , interestingly , this does not mean that they can be treated in qualitatively different ways -- such as be attacked . 

  There are thus no circumstances in which the Chewong may behave in contradiction to their ideologically constructed concept of human nature . 

  To them , the meaning of human is to be fearful , and this permeates their cosmology . 

  Conversely , to be angry , quarrelsome , or brave marks one off as not human . 

  Such characteristics , in effect , either prevent social relations from being established or , whenever manifested through behaviour , they cut them off . 

  CONCLUSION 

  In the Introduction to this volume we ask : can anthropologists contribute anything to questions concerning human aggression ? 

  Have I done so in this paper ? 

  I have tried to present a society where aggressive behaviour as we understand it -- however loosely defined -- is not much in evidence . 

  Robarchek ( 1979 ) has suggested that the Semai , from the earliest childhood , learn to fear arousal of all kinds , resulting in a general ethos of low-key emotionality . 

  I agree with much of his interpretation and find that my understanding of the Chewong coincides in many instances with his of the Semai . 

  But I would place a somewhat different emphasis , and suggest that in the Chewong case fear is a positive emotion and encouraged in children because to be fearful is to be human , while the arousal of other inner states is negatively valued and discouraged -- as manifest in the various rules that forbid them ( see Howell 1981 ) . 

  They are not part of being human . 

  In an earlier paper ( 1977 ) Robarchek argues that Schachter's frustration -- aggression theory can be found to hold among the Semai when we examine one of their rules , punan , whereby any kind of " frustration " ( I call it " unfulfilled desire " as found in the rule punen among the Chewong ) must never be allowed to persist . 

  It is only by alleviating frustration immediately , or even before it becomes experienced , Robarchek argues , that the Semai are able to be so non-violent . 

  Thus he seems to be arguing from within a position which holds that aggression is an innate attribute of sufficient strength that it needs to be redirected in some way for it not to manifest itself in interhuman relations . 

  However , he argues strongly for the claim that successful handling of aggressive impulses is culturally possible ( see also his paper in this volume ) . 

  I have argued throughout this paper against the various theories that hold that human aggression is so formidable as to require special mechanisms for handling or redirection . 

  Thus , in the anthropological literature , ritual is often explained in terms of " letting off steam " . 

  Various pent-up emotions can be released and an emotional equilibrium restored ( Scheff 1979 ; Gluckman 1963 ; Heelas 1983 ; Briggs 1970 ) . 

  Heelas ( 1982 ) has also discussed the usefulness of catharsis as a general explanation for shedding undesirable violent emotions , and argues that the catharsis view of aggression may be too simplistic . 

  Not only does the contradictory nature of the evidence preclude any generalization , but it is difficult to conduct any cross-cultural comparisons because there is no agreement as to what should be compared . 

  While admitting that the actor's definition of violence may differ from culture to culture , thereby making a universal definition impossible , Heelas nevertheless accepts a priori the presence of the " thing " violence in all of us . 

  " ... [ I ] t can not be argued that violence exists solely as a cultural phenomenon ... violence is almost certainly embedded in the natural world " ( 1982 : 54 ) . 

  Explicitly or implicitly , the various theories treat aggression as an absolute discrete " thing " , which , when it appears to be absent in a particular society , has somehow to be accounted for . 

  It is this assumption which I have been questioning in this paper . 

  If one is still searching for ways to explain this absence , believing with most ethologists , socio-biologists , and even some social anthropologists that aggression is part of human nature , then the obvious place to look is for some form of ritual as catharsis , or try to identify some other culturally constructed behaviour pattern which allows the individual Chewong to shed negatively valued arousal states , like anger , which according to such theories would build up and erupt in uncontrolled violent behaviour . 

  Not only have I been unable to identify any such ritual -- it would , for instance , be incorrect to interpret the shamanistic seance as practised by the Chewong in such terms -- but other practices , analogous to eskimo dog beating as presented by Briggs ( 1970 ) are equally absent . 

  However , I would argue that it begs the question to phrase it in such a way . 

  I do not disregard the possibility that some rituals in some societies do indeed perform such a function , but this interpretation would be meaningful only if the members of those societies could be shown in their various ideas and practices -- in particular those concerning personhood -- to endorse such an interpretation . 

  In other words , let us avoid a priori assertions about human nature and try instead to perform a systematic explication of indigenous ideas concerning human nature and social and cosmological relationships . 

  The question I think we should ask is not , " Is violence learnt or innate ? " , but rather , " What are the ideological constructs that encourage violent or peaceful behaviour and make it meaningful and proper ? " , and the closely related one , " What do the behaviour patterns mean to the participants ? " 

  Do they perceive themselves as " aggressive " or " peaceful " , and if so , " What are the semantic connotations of the words used ? 

  " In order to ascertain the indigenous meanings , I suggest that indigenous concepts be explored , and the vocabulary denoting inner states examined . 

  Which experiential and behavioural characteristics are valued by the members of a particular social group ? 

  There are only a few societies where all members hold the same characteristics to be applicable to everyone . 

  Men and women , for instance , may in many cases be characterized as different in this regard -- their human nature may not be identical -- and proper interpretative emphasis must be given in such cases . 

  While such an approach may seem inconclusive , it is one that allows each cultural situation to be interpreted in internally appropriate ways , while at the same time giving full credence to the psychic and cognitive unity of humanity . 

  Empirical examples of peaceful societies , which do not need some release mechanism for assumed aggressive drives , should at least alert us to the possibly false linking of human aggression and human nature . 

  As Montagu ( 1976 ) has stated again and again , the social activity of war need have no relationship with the inner state of aggression . 

  To confuse the two confuses the issue in general . 

  As fearful , angry , brave , quarrelsome , competitive , kind , generous , cooperative etc. do not exist in the world as measurable qualities , but humans as social beings may develop all , or none , to varying extents , so social behaviour like war can only be explained with reference to complex social factors , not to some assumed universal inner state . 

  SYM 1989 Signe Howell 

  REFERENCES 

  3 

  Chapter Three 

  SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS OF TRANQUILLITY AND AGGRESSION AMONG THE BUID 

  THOMAS GIBSON 

  This chapter will describe the symbolic representations of uway ('tranquillity' ) , isug ('aggression' ) , and related moral concepts among the Buid , a group of shifting cultivators inhabiting the highlands of Mindoro , Philippines . l In my view , the Buid may be fairly described as a society " at peace " because of the extremely low value they attach to " aggression " and the extremely high value they attach to " tranquillity " . 

  DEFINITIONS 

  At the conference in which this paper was first presented , there was a great deal of discussion about how one is to define concepts like " peace " and " aggression " for comparative purposes , and , as always in such discussions , a fair amount of pessimism about the possibility of success . 

  Since some of the issues raised in these definitional discussions and addressed elsewhere in this volume have a bearing on the approach adopted in this paper , it is necessary to say something about them first . 

  The most basic issue is whether we are to define aggression without reference to native concepts . 

  Those who argue that a universal definition of aggression is possible and even desirable are often interested in determining whether a universal human proclivity toward aggression exists , or whether the members of one society can be said to be " more aggressive " than another according to some quantitative scale . 

  For my part , I doubt the feasibility of such attempts to disengage the meaning of the word " aggression " from local systems of meaning . 

  In this paper , I shall treat " aggression " as a moral concept like that of " good " or " evil " . 

  My usage therefore represents a " translation " of a native Buid concept , and is defined in opposition to other Buid concepts . 

  The comparative implications of adopting this approach are that the meaning of what we are labelling " aggression " will necessarily vary from case to case , depending on how the native concepts to which it is opposed vary from case to case . 

  It then becomes impossible to rank societies as more or less aggressive than one another , just as it is impossible to say that one society is more or less evil than another . 

  Evil and aggression , in this sense , exist in every society , as a means of defining the good and the peaceful ( or cowardly ) ( see Campbell , this volume ) . 

  Of course , our decision to translate a particular concept as " aggression " presupposes a very general similarity between the place of that concept in the native system of moral categories and its place in our own system . 

  My point is simply that once an " emic " definition is attempted , we must go beyond looking for an " essential " definition of an isolated concept , and discuss the whole structure of moral categories . 

  It is these structures which must then be compared , not their elements . 

  In any one society , the meaning of " aggression " will be determined by the presence or absence of related concepts such as " bravery " , " cowardice " , " honour " , " peacemaker " , " bully " , and so on . 

  Once we turn to actual ethnographic cases , it is usually not very difficult to identify concepts which seem to overlap with our concept of " aggression " , at least in some of its usages . 

  For the purposes of this paper , only a portion of the total semantic field covered by the English term is relevant . 

  This is because the term is rather ambivalent in English , having both " good senses " an , d " bad senses " . 

  The bad senses cluster around the notion of deliberately causing harm to another being or entity . 

  In the extreme case this is done without provocation and through pure malice . 

  These notions are also central to the Buid concept of isug . 

  In the English case , the positive usages , particularly of the adjectival form " aggressive " , cluster around the notions of being " self-assertive " , " driven to succeed " , and so on . 

  These may be more common in American than in British English . 

  They are absent in the Buid case . 

  But here a central ambiguity creeps in . 

  While the notion of " deliberately causing harm " may be central to a culture's concept of aggression , actual instances of " aggressive conduct " are always open to interpretation and reinterpretation . 

  This is true of all conduct interpreted as having a moral relevance , as being a sign of virtue or vice . 

  Immoral or antisocial conduct demands an explanation in terms of inherently unobservable causes , be they " motives " , " intentions " , " desires " , " proclivities " , " spirit attack " , " witchcraft " , " disorders of the humoural system " , and so on . 

  What is more , the same conduct may be subjected to a series of different interpretations as subsequent events show it to be part of a pattern of conduct or as an isolated instance , as implicating a wider or narrower range of social relationships , and so on . 

  This notion is familiar from accounts of the diagnosis of disease in traditional societies . 

  What may in the first instance be attributed to physical causes and treated by an herbalist may , if it persists or grows more severe , be redefined as caused by mystical forces requiring treatment by a diviner ( see Horton 1970 : 142 ) . 

  Indeed , in many societies disease may itself be viewed as a sign of moral failure , either of the victim or of some " witch " . 

  Among the Buid , momentary expressions of anger may be viewed in the first instance as indicative of a momentary desire to harm another , but if such conduct becomes persistent or habitual it is almost always reinterpreted as being caused by hostile mystical forces and thus as not being under the deliberate control of the individual . 

  Now , even if all instances of " aggressive conduct " were ultimately reinterpreted as being caused by an external agency , the ideal model of aggression as " deliberately causing harm " would still exist as a model . 

  Indeed , the very necessity of reinterpreting an act as not deliberate presupposes the idea that it might have been . 

  What I would like to suggest here is that the Buid view aggressive conduct as a sort of moral infirmity requiring explanation in much the same manner as does a physical infirmity . 

  As the conduct in question enters the public arena of moral argumentation , what lies behind it , and so what kind of thing it " really is " , changes . 

  Given the inherent uncertainty of moral interpretation in social life , it would be foolish to believe that we could come up with a definition of aggression that would allow us to unambiguously classify , much less measure , instances of aggressive conduct in unfamiliar societies . 

  The fact that acts of violence , aggression , or even boastfulness ( buagun ) are consistently condemned , and the lack of any positive evaluation of acts of " bravery " or " courage " , may result in a lower rate of deliberate maiming and homicide among the Buid than among populations which attach positive evaluations to such acts ( everything else being equal ) . 

  Homicide rates are interesting in themselves , but they can never be explained simply in terms of cultural definitions or psychological dispositions . 

  They represent the product of a number of other factors as well , including political , economic , and demographic ones as they intersect at particular moments in history ( see Howe , this volume ) . 

  They are not my primary concern in this paper . 

  While I question the possibility of ranking Buid society as more or less " peaceful " according to some culture-free , quantitative standard , I think it can be placed in a category of relatively " peaceful " societies because of the complete absence of any social situation in which aggressive conduct is assigned a positive value . 

  This is not to say that acts which we , or the Buid , would interpret as aggressive never occur , but that such acts are viewed as deviations from the ideals of Buid political culture . 

  In the following sections , I begin by discussing Buid attitudes toward aggression and its opposite , tranquillity , in the daily life of the community . 

  In the next part , I describe Buid attitudes towards what they perceive as the intrinsic aggressiveness of their lowland Christian neighbours , before turning to the activity in which the symbolism of tranquillity and aggression receives its greatest elaboration : animal sacrifice . 

  The discussion thus begins with relations internal to the human community , proceeds to those between the community and its human neighbours , and ends with the relations between the human and non-human worlds . 

  RELATIONS WITHIN THE BUID PERSON 

  When treating the meanings of moral concepts such as aggression and tranquillity , it is necessary to say something , about the local theory of the moral agent , or person . 

  Among the Buid , an individual is made up of three components : a physical body ( abilugan ) , a soul or vital principle ( falad ) , and a mind ( fangayufan ) . 

  The soul is said to reside in the upper torso , and is the seat of the emotions . 

  It is vulnerable to attack by predatory spirits of various types , who are said to " bite " the souls of their victims . 

  Death results when the soul becomes detached from the body . 

  At death , the soul is transformed into a " ghost " ( labang taw ) . 

  Ghosts represent the soul in a pure state , as it were , dissociated from both a body and a controlling mind . 

  Now , ghosts are regarded as being greedy for meat and as possessive of their former spouses , both forms of behaviour condemned as anti-social among the living . 

  They are also regarded as being capable of causing illness or even death to get their way . 

  In this sense , one of the components of the personality is regarded as being inherently " aggressive " , except that in life it is normally held in check by the mind . 

  The mind is less closely associated with the body than is the soul . 

  It is associated with perception , especially sight and hearing , but above all with speech and understanding . 

  Although it does not survive death , it is closely associated in life with a category of immortal spirits , the lai , which act as spirit familiars to mediums . 

  It is the mind of the medium , not the soul , which travels during a seance and which acts to defend the community in an altruistic manner . 

  Spirit mediums may not be paid for their services , and their power comes primarily from their collective efforts in large group seances . 

  Virtually every adult man , and a few older women , possess familiars . 

  Working in teams , groups of mediums and their familiars mount an almost continual watch on the predatory spirit world , protecting the souls of the living from attack . 

  The mind and spirit familiars are thus inherently social and associated with language and perception , while the soul and ghosts are inherently egocentric and associated with eating and desire . 

  I shall return to the opposition between speech and eating toward the end of this paper . 

  Persistent aggression is a deviation not only from social convention , but from the way people " naturally " are , since the mind is thought to be properly in control of the soul ( cf . 

  Strathern 1980 ; 198 ) . 

  Persistent aggression requires an explanation in terms of exogenous , supernatural forces . 

  An aggressive person is open to accusations of being in league with or under the control of malign mystical powers . 

  Small children who engage in anti-social acts like tantrums and quarrelling are equally apt to be diagnosed as having been " bitten " on their falad by one of a number of invisible beings : fangugyab , " that which causes crying " , fangarisugan , " that which causes quarrelling " , fansungun , " that which causes depression " , and so on . 

  The very old and the young have a weaker mind than those in their prime and are for this reason more vulnerable to spirit attack . 

  They are also more vulnerable to uncontrolled emotional states , such as anger or jealousy . 

  Buid describe these feelings in terms of the soul rising up from the chest into the neck and issuing forth in bitter words or even violence if not held in check by the mind . 

  The mental community formed by adult mediums in collective seances must then add its protection and control to the souls of the vulnerable old and young to maintain the peace and order within the community as a whole . 

  Peace and order on the empirical plane is established and maintained through a series of tultulan , " collective discussions " , in which the unruly emotions of those who have been involved in quarrelling ( garisugan , " mutually aggressive acts " ) are brought back until order and peace , uway , is restored . 

  RELATIONS WITHIN THE BUID COMMUNITY 

  Elsewhere I have described Buid childrearing practices and I will merely summarize that account here ( Gibson 1985 ) . 

  Within Buid society , the only social relationships in which hierarchy and dependency are legitimate are those between children and adults , and these relationships are governed by an idiom of shared physical and spiritual substance I call " kinship " . 

  The aim of socialization is to bring children to a point at which they are no longer dependent on their senior relatives . 

  Instead , they should be able to participate in the community of autonomous adults as equal members engaged in the sharing of labour , food , and speech without ever becoming indebted to other specific individuals . 

  I employ the term' sharing' in a technical sense to distinguish it from " reciprocity " as a specific type of transaction . 

  Reciprocity implies dualism or symmetry : a give and take between two equivalent groups or individuals , in which the potentiality for debt is always present ( Polanyi 1957 ) . 

  Sharing implies an asymmetry : it is a transaction between an individual and a group . 

  The individual gives to the group as an undifferentiated whole , and receives only as a member of a larger group . 

  The potential for dyadic relations of indebtedness is thereby eliminated . 

  As an individual matures , the idiom of kinship is increasingly replaced by an idiom of companionship , in which social relationships are governed by an idiom of shared activity . 

  The point of the idiom of companionship is that it allows individuals to form and to dissolve ties with one another with greater ease and frequency than would the idiom of shared substance . 

  The gradual detachment of the child from dependency on specific adults is accomplished through three principal mechanisms : a high rate of divorce , peer-group learning , and a minimization of the authoritarian aspect of the parental role . 

  Children are likely to be brought into contact with , and dependence on , a large number of " step " relatives because of the first mechanism . 

  Their subordination to adults in general is minimized by what might almost be called an avoidance of them : from the age of five or six , they return home only to eat and sleep , and spend the rest of their time in unsupervised gangs . 

  Finally , children are never punished for disobedience . 

  Indeed , it is more likely that a small child will attempt to command an adult than the other way around . 

  I never witnessed an adult raise his or her hand , or even voice , to a child . 

  Among adults , the ideal is that everyone treats each other as an autonomous equal , and that everyone performs their material and ritual obligations to the community . 

  Conflict is dealt with through simple avoidance -- Buid traditionally lived in isolated family homesteads -- or through the submission of a dispute to a formal tultulan , " collective discussion " , in which a sum of compensation is mutually agreed and paid . 

  The most common type of dispute is divorce , since spouses can not , by Buid cultural definition , avoid one another for long . 

  One or other spouse is generally recognized as the one being " abandoned " , and is entitled to damages for emotional upset . 

  No one has the authority to enforce a settlement , but through extended discussion and diffuse moral pressure , divorces are normally settled without undue disruption . 

  The emphasis throughout is on preserving communal harmony ( uway ) through the separation or reconciliation of the disputants . 

  Individuals who are reluctant to go along with the sentiments expressed in a collective discussion may be castigated as unduly kaingli , " jealous " , or kongit , " possessive " , of their spouses , an infringement of the legitimate autonomy of the latter . 

  While individuals have certain rights in their spouses , rights recognized by the compensation they receive when they are " abandoned " , these rights are always subordinate to the rights of individuals to freely choose their consociates . 

  Worse than jealousy or possessiveness , however , is the attempt to establish superiority over others . 

  In a mild form this is simply boastfulness , buagun , a term whose root can also mean simply " lying " . 

  A boastful individual is apt to be deflated through ridicule , or simply ignored , an art at which the Buid are true masters . 

  If an individual attempts to assert superiority through force , the line is crossed into aggressive , maisug , behaviour . 

  As I noted above , simple withdrawal is the preferred solution to conflict . 

  The socially approved response to aggression is avoidance or even flight . 

  The Buid language is rich in words for fear , fleeing , and escape from danger , none of which carries negative moral overtones . 

  It is not uncommon for people when telling stories about themselves to stress how frightened they were by some experience . 

  Far from rendering them subject to ridicule , such a stress is one of the best ways to hold an audience and gain sympathy . 

  By contrast , the only Buid words which might be used to translate our concepts of " courage " and " bravery " carry strongly negative moral overtones : words like isug denote not so much an indifference to personal danger as a tendency to fierceness or violence . 

  The emphasis is less on an individual's inner resources than on the danger he or she poses to others . 

  Withdrawal from conflict can be emotional as well as spatial . 

  Sulking is a common occurrence , but it may sometimes be carried to an anti-social extreme . 

  Extreme emotional withdrawal , or suicidal depression ( sungun ) , is viewed as a common affliction of those whose desires have been thwarted , especially in affairs of the heart . 

  Like aggression , it may be blamed on attack by a predatory spirit . 

  Suicide is carried out according to a culturally standardized formula : after two weeks of sulking , one finally withdraws into the deep forest away from all human habitation , and hangs oneself from a tree . 

  The body of a suicide is not buried , but left to hang until the rope breaks . 

  The ghost associated with it remains a permanent threat to the living , as it wanders the earth with a stretched neck looking for companions . 

  It is only after the death and complete dehumanization of the suicide that they threaten physical harm to those who offended them in life . 

  As I explain further below , aggressive behaviour is regarded as typical only of lowlanders and spirits . 

  But before turning to Buid relations with neighbouring lowlanders , I will bring out the specificity of Buid attitudes toward violence and aggression by comparing them with other Philippine groups who have a less negative attitude toward these phenomena . 

  COMPARISON WITH OTHER PHILIPPINE GROUPS 

  A sharp contrast to the Buid is provided by the Tausug , a Muslim group inhabiting the Sulu archipelago in the southern Philippines . 

  During the heyday of the Sulu sultanate from 1780- 1880 the Tausug conducted frequent slave raiding and plundering expeditions against the Spanish-dominated Philippines , especially Mindoro . 

  Among the Tausug today , one's social position must be continually revalidated , and this depends on one's ability to respond to assaults on one's honour with immediate violence . 

  Interestingly , they use the same term for aggression as the Buid , but give it precisely the opposite moral evaluation : " A maisug person is combative and not deterred by physical danger and risk , one who has strong feelings and is not afraid to express them ... 

  Public cowardice or a refusal to respond to an insult or affront is shameful in the extreme " ( Kiefer 1972 : 53 ) . 

  Having said this , however , Kiefer goes on to point out that the masculine ideal of violent pride is in tension with the religious ideal of revenge as being God's prerogative . 

  There is a similar tension inherent in the ambiguity of the Tagalog concept of tapang . 

  The Tagalog people traditionally inhabited central Luzon , and their language now serves as the basis for the Philippine national language . 

  While being called matapang is taken as a compliment among Tagalog-speaking lowlanders , it describes fierce or dangerous men , ready to fight without regard to personal danger , rather than those willing to risk themselves for others . 

  It is taken as a compliment because a man with a reputation as dangerous will be respected . 

  The contrast I am trying to draw between courage on the one hand , and isug or tapang on the other , is similar to that between guilt and shame . 

  The former stresses the individual's internal state , the latter his or her relations with others . 

  The Buid rejection of isug does not imply a readiness to submit to the will of others . 

  Their belief in individual autonomy is such that even children are not required to obey their elders . 

  What is rejected is the necessity or even possibility of maintaining or augmenting one's social position through violence . 

  One's social position as an autonomous , equal adult is ascribed : Buid youths do not have to achieve equality with or autonomy from adult men through acts of violence , as among so many headhunting societies in Southeast Asia . 

  Nor do adult men have to defend their position by recourse to force : there is no shame attached to fleeing from aggression . 

  And the devaluation of violence puts Buid women at an advantage relative to women in warlike societies . 

  Given women's lesser upper-body strength as compared with men's , a positive evaluation of violence helps to legitimate male domination . 

  The connotation of internal strength attached to the English concept of bravery is expressed in Buid with the phrase marigun fag fangayufan , literally " strong minded " . 

  The equivalent in Tagalog is lakas ng loob , or " internal strength " . 

  In these instances , the stress is on an individual's ability to bear misfortune stoically , to overcome hardship by drawing on one's internal resources . 

  The association between fortitude and capacity for violence is absent in the Buid concept of isug , present to a certain extent in the Tagalog concept of tapang , and quite clear in the English concept of bravery . 

  I would suggest that in each case the strength of the association is a measure of each culture's commitment to the overcoming of adversity through aggressive or violent acts . 

  For the Buid , this is always illegitimate . 

  For Tagalogs , it is a rather amoral possibility : violent individuals are respected , but there is a less than human quality about them and violent acts are often carried out under the cover of a real or assumed drunkenness . 

  RELATIONS WITH OUTSIDERS 

  Tagalog concepts are directly relevant to the present discussion because the Buid with whom I lived are in daily contact with Tagalog speaking immigrants from neighbouring islands . 

  As is the case with the Semai and the Chewong , the Buid define their values in opposition to those of their aggressive lowland neighbours ( Dentan 1975 ; Howell , this volume ) . 

  Many other writers working in Southeast Asia have drawn attention to the fact that particular ethno-linguistic groups can not be treated in isolation , but must be regarded as forming part of a larger social system . 

  The classic example is , of course , Leach's work on highland Burma . 

  Nearer to the Buid , Morris has described the Melanau of Borneo as living in a " highly diversified social environment in which many cultural and linguistic groups are interspersed with and closely related to one another " ( 1967 : 216 ) . 

  Morris goes on to argue that the Melanau image of the spirit world reproduces this social environment by representing the cosmos as " a kind of loose composite or " international " society knit together by a commonly held " rule of law "' ( 1967 : 214 ) . 

  Now , while such a description can be applied to Buid relations with neighbouring highland groups and with certain types of spirits , it is not applicable to their relations with lowlanders . 

  The Buid do not regard themselves , and are not regarded by the Christians , as belonging to the same social system , and as sharing an underlying set of political values . 

  Between the Buid and the Christians there is a difference in outlook so profound that one might almost say that a state of permanent antagonism and hostility prevails between them . 

  In this conflict the society of the Christians is incalculably more powerful . 

  Lowland Philippine political culture is relevant to the Buid because lowlanders are continually trying to draw the Buid into it , and the Buid are continually trying to resist it . 

  It is a political culture in which the strong man dominates a series of lesser men through intimidation and debt . 

  Patrons attach clients to themselves by extending loans to the latter in times of crisis . 

  The fundamentally asymmetrical relationship between a landlord and his tenant is expressed as one of reciprocity , however : a landlord and his tenant are both called kasama , " companions " or " partners " , the former supplying the land and sometimes the capital and equipment for farming , and the latter the labour . 

  After the harvest , each is said to receive his " share " ( bahagi ) of the product . 

  This dependency of the weak on the strong has a moral component . 

  Because the client or tenant is in a state of long-term indebtedness , he owes his patron a " debt of gratitude " and should be ready to help the latter on a diffuse , non-contractual basis . 

  Patron-client ties often receive ritual sanction through the institution of godparenthood . 

  The parents of a sponsored child become the comadre or compadre of the patron . 

  Now , the term compadre , or its abbreviated form pare , is normally used in address to indicate intimacy and equality . 

  By converting a patron into a compadre , a client is again trying to represent a fundamentally hierarchical relationship as one of mutuality and reciprocity . 

  Compadrinazgo ties can not be created between Buid and lowlanders because the Buid reject the Christian rituals on which they are based . 

  Instead , Christian traders attempt to implicate the Buid in the ancient Filipino institution of blood brotherhood . 

  Christians now use sandugo , " one blood " , as a universal term of address and reference for the Buid . 

  Like compadre it carries the same moral connotations of diffuse , enduring obligation and the same quality of masking a hierarchical relationship in the mutuality of kinship relations . 

  The Buid resent the use of the term and the attempt to place them in the moral as well as material debt of the lowlanders . 

  The lowlanders are sub-moral beings in Buid eyes , given their aggressive and domineering customs . 

  The poor Christian settlers in the mountains view the Buid as standing in the same relationship to them as they stand to their own patrons . 

  The Buid are sub-moral in Christian eyes because of their refusal to " properly " acknowledge their debts . 

  Contemporary tensions between the Buid and Christian settlers from the lowlands must be placed in historical perspective . 

  When the Spanish arrived in Mindoro in 1570 , they discovered coastal settlements paying tribute to the Sultan of Brunei . 

  The Spanish expelled the Muslims from the island , but were not able to bring it under their full control , or defend its inhabitants from Muslim raiders , until nearly the end of the nineteenth century . 

  The last recorded raids occurred in 1870 and 1874 . 

  During this 300-year period , coastal settlements were repeatedly raided for captives to supply the slave markets of Sulu in the southern Philippines , and the once prosperous ports were reduced to impoverished and depopulated backwaters . 

  Mindoro served , in effect , as a battleground between the Spanish based in Manila and the Muslim traders based in Sulu . 

  While little direct evidence is available on the fate of the mountain populations during this period , there is little doubt they were too weak numerically and organizationally to put up any effective resistance to either power . 

  While the Muslims were after captives , the Spanish were after tribute-paying subjects and converts . 

  The Hispanized inhabitants of the lowlands viewed the unconverted pagans as little better than animals , whose lack of sophistication in dealing with a market economy allowed them to be exploited through debt bondage and coerced trade . 

  More recently , the primary threat has been to the highlanders' land , although coerced labour and unequal trade continue . 

  But however the goals of their lowland neighbours have shifted over time , they have remained essentially predatory . 

  The fluidity of Buid social groupings , and the ease with which the institution of sharing allows individuals to integrate into new groups , provide the best protections a weak society can have against predatory neighbours . 

  There are no internal bonds or hierarchies which the outside powers can use to control the behaviour of more than one individual at a time . 

  An enemy who will not stand and fight , and who has sufficient room to move and hide can not be " defeated " or absorbed . 

  This fact accounts for the continued autonomy not only of the Buid but of many other shifting cultivators and hunter-gatherers in Africa and Asia ( Gibson , in press ) . 

  These peoples can not allow themselves much investment in fixed assets they would need to defend , but just as importantly they can not allow themselves much investment in social ties to specific others . 

  Hence the positive value attached to mobility and sharing in their societies . 

  Of more direct relevance to the thesis of this paper is the association of acts of violence and aggression , both material and mystical , with forces external to the society . 

  Unable to profit through such acts under any conditions , the Buid never associate aggression against humans with the generation of wealth or vitality . 

  But there is one form of aggression which is not only legitimate , but positively enjoined : the sacrifice of animals . 

  RELATIONS WITH THE ANIMAL AND SPIRIT WORLDS 

  I already introduced certain mystical categories above in my discussion of Buid personhood , particularly those relating to spirit mediumship . 

  Here I wish to focus on the employment of carefully controlled acts of aggression against the animal world as a means of modifying their relations with the spirit world . 

  The Buid perform at least five different kinds of animal sacrifice , each intended for a different type of spirit . 

  But the Buid also view themselves as constituting a sort of animal ultimately destined to provide a feast for a class of spirits after death . 

  They say that " Taw an labang babuy " : " People are the pigs of the predatory spirits . " 

  They also say that " Labang taw agkagat taw maskin kasamuk taguban " : " Ghosts bite people because they are hungry for meat . 

  " An examination of these five kinds of sacrifice , and of the system of belief underlying these two statements , reveals a symbolic world in which aggression and tranquillity are viewed as opposing principles held in uncertain balance by ritual action ( see Gibson 1986 for a full account ) . 

  Animals are killed only to avert mystical dangers which cause illness and death . 

  The more animals a household is obliged to sacrifice , the greater has been its misfortune . 

  Because of this , a household obliged to sponsor many feasts gains no prestige , but becomes rather an object of pity . 

  Whenever a pig or chicken is killed , it must be shared out in exactly equal portions among all the members of the community , without regard to their age , sex , status as kinsman , or previous relationship with the sponsor of the sacrifice . 

  The size of the " community " involved in these distributions varies depending on the nature of the occasion and the number of animals killed . 

  This variation is due to the amount of interest generated by a particular ritual among members of distant settlements . 

  It is not due to the exclusion of certain categories of people from attendance . 

  Most meat distributions involve a local group numbering between fifty and one hundred individuals . 

  On certain occasions , representatives from all the local communities in a region containing 700 individuals or more will attend . 

  One such occasion is the final ritual performed to terminate the funeral cycle three months after a death . 

  On the whole , an individual may expect to attend a sacrifice every one or two weeks , so that there is a constant circulation of meat throughout the community . 

  In fact , the sharing of meat is the most frequent form of material transaction between households , and a key means of integrating new members into the local community . 

  Thus while all domesticated animals belong to , and are closely identified with , particular households , they are all destined to be consumed by the community as a whole . 

  One might say that when a particular household is confronted by a mystical threat , it dissolves its individual identity into that of a larger social unit whose size is determined by the severity of the threat . 

  It does this by sharing something closely identified with its members , the animals they have domesticated by hand , with the encompassing community in a commensal ritual . 

  Although carefully controlled , aggression is an inescapable aspect of Buid animal sacrifice . 

  In all of the rituals described above , animal vitality is deliberately concentrated and transferred to those members of the human community most in need of vital reinforcement , such as small children and nursing mothers . 

  The animals are always chopped into small pieces and further reduced by boiling . 

  The life-giving qualities of pork broth are brought out in a lisbay , or myth , concerning the culture hero Litaw : 

  During an extended period of wandering in the sky world , Litaw met Inabay , who gave him some dust from her eyes . 

  This dust gave Litaw magical powers . 

  When he returned to earth , he discovered that his father had died . 

  Litaw said : " Never mind . 

  Get me a big pig and we shall cook it . " 

  The pig made five pots of broth . 

  Litaw fetched his father's corpse , which was still rolled up in its burial mat and starting to decay . 

  Litaw poured the pots of broth over the body , one by one . 

  As he began pouring the fifth , the body stirred , and Litaw's father said : " That's enough , I am being scalded . " 

  And so he came back to life . 

  Another method for concentrating animal vitality is the stew prepared for ghosts , in which elements of every part of the animal are cooked together with rice . 

  When a wild pig is caught , the meat of the head is set aside for small children , for the vital principle is associated with it . 

  The point is that violence is a necessary part of human interaction with the non-human world , but absolutely illegitimate within it . 

  Violence and aggression tend to be associated symbolically with eating , which is a one-way relationship of domination , and so is incompatible with mutuality which is symbolically associated with speech , a two-way relationship between equals . 

  The opposition between aggression and mutuality , eating and speaking , is underlined in Buid symbolism by the presence of a taboo against speaking to animals . 

  This taboo belongs to the same category , fayawan , as incest and other rules against mixing things which should be kept separate . 

  The existence of an explicit prohibition on treating animals as social beings indicates that the Buid might in fact have ambivalent feelings on the subject . 

  Other evidence of this ambivalence concerns the way they treat young animals , raising them by hand inside the house to encourage their attachment to their owners . 

  When a particularly close rapport develops between a human and an animal , such that the animal will follow its owner through the forest , the animal is called a batiti , " pet " . 

  One must still not talk to the pet in human language , however . 

  In Mindoro , domesticated pigs and chickens often go wild , and wild pigs and chickens can be domesticated if captured young . 

  Every generation of pig and chicken must be deliberately domesticated or incorporated into human society lest it go wild . 

  One may employ uncontrolled violence only against wild animals which are totally independent of human society . 

  The Buid make an effort to reduce the suffering , or , at least , the struggling , of domesticated animals when they are slaughtered . 

  They are usually partially asphyxiated before being stabbed . 

  That is , they do this in every case except that of an exorcism ritual where the point is to make a deliberate display of violence and aggression , in the sense of " intentionally causing suffering to another being " , to frighten the predatory spirits . 

  Even then , the slaughter is carried out without malice toward the animal . 

  The predatory spirits , on the other hand , are described as if they bore actual malice toward humans . 

  Commensality provides the most powerful means by which both the Buid and the predatory spirits assert the internal solidarity of their respective collectivities . 

  From the perspective of humans , solidarity is expressed in opposition to a category of predatory beings which regard humans as their prey , on the one hand , and to a category of prey which regard humans as their predators , on the other . 

  The human community is , in fact , regarded as but one level in a cosmic system of stratification defined in terms of the inherently unequal relationship between the eater and the eaten . 

  The higher the stratum , the more aggressive and evil are the beings . 

  Pigs , for example , eat only plants . 

  The latter are essentially passive and do not suffer before they are consumed . 

  Humans eat pigs , but only after killing them , and cooking them , in a controlled and " humane " manner . 

  They have , moreover , previously fed and cared for them , or in the case of wild pigs , they have paid their spirit " owners " proper compensation . 

  In a sense , the pigs already " owe " their masters their lives . 

  The predatory spirits , finally , obtain human flesh by invading human territory and seizing , through force , what they have not produced . 

  What is more , they begin to consume their victims while they are still alive , or , alternatively , once they have begun to rot . 

  The most powerful and feared of all the predatory spirits are the fangablang , " those who are encountered " . 

  These are said to resemble giant Christian lowlanders , and are continually invading Buid settlements in search of human flesh . 

  Cannibalism is a subject of fascination and exquisite horror for the Buid , as it is for Europeans ( see Arens 1979 ) . 

  It condenses in a vivid image the most extreme form of violence and domination imaginable : the treatment of a social being as an animal , and the incorporation of its substance into one's own body . 

  Through their transistor radios , the Buid are aware of various gira ( Spanish guerra , " war " ) being fought in different parts of the world . 

  Significantly , they are convinced that such extreme instances of violent behaviour can have only one purpose : killing and eating the enemy . 

  Standing in opposition to the predatory spirits are the spirits of the earth , who are closely associated with the spirit familiars discussed above under Buid personhood . 

  The Buid say that the growth and well-being of their crops and children derive from the spirits of the earth . 

  In general , the Buid place far more stress on the process of growth than on the acts of planting seed or of conceiving children . 

  This process is guaranteed by the spirits of the earth , who withdraw their protection from the human community when it is divided by quarrelling . 

  Thus persistent aggression ( garisugan ) within the community places all its crops and children in mystical danger . 

  The need to restore tranquillity , particularly between husband and wife , in order to regain the protection of the spirits of the earth is a major incentive for resolving tultulan , " collective discussions " , quickly and smoothly . 

  Now , the spirits of the earth are the only spirits which can be addressed in ordinary human speech in the course of a ritual . 

  Speech and communal peace represent life and unity just as eating and individual desire represent death and division . 

  CONCLUSION 

  In conclusion it may be said that the structure of the spirit world constitutes both a model of and a model for the larger social system in which the Buid are embedded . 

  At one extreme are the relations of permanent hostility between the Buid and Christians , paralleled on the mystical plane by the permanent struggle between the spirit familiars and the predatory spirits . 

  At the other extreme are the relations of mutual help and sharing within the Buid community paralleled on the mystical plane by the solidarity between the humans and the spirits of the earth . 

  Continued life and growth depend ultimately on the maintenance of tranquillity within the human community , which is a prerequisite for the continued assistance of the spirits of the earth . 

  But it is equally necessary that humans engage in a ceaseless and violent struggle with beings which attack from outside the bounds of society . 

  The rejection by the Buid of any form of legitimate hierarchy or aggression within their society must be set within the context of a larger cosmological system in which humans are under constant attack by both predatory spirits and lowlanders , and in which they must commit parallel acts of aggression against their animals . 

  Buid attitudes toward tranquillity and violence are the product of a long historical process , in which they were consistently the victims of outside forces . 

  During this period , acts of aggression and domination came to be identified symbolically with the agents of disease and death , while a state of internal tranquillity , equality and individual autonomy came to be identified with the agents of health and growth . 

  These identifications are part of the reason for their continued autonomy from the lowlands , in that they prevent the Buid from developing internal hierarchies which could be manipulated by more powerful state societies . 

  They are also partly the result of the Buid's occupation of a habitat marginal to the economy of the lowlands : unable to permanently occupy Buid territory , the lowland powers have been content until now with sporadic , predatory incursions . 

  An ideology of peace is thus both cause and effect of the Buid's situation in a larger regional system ( Gibson , in press ) . 

  It should now be clear that Buid attitudes toward peace and violence can not be understood in terms of innate psycho-biological dispositions , or in terms of their adaptation of the natural environment . 

  The Buid have as much of a capacity for violent behaviour as the members of any other society . 

  What is interesting is that this capacity is not developed , or its exercise rewarded in Buid society . 

  An instructive example of members of a peaceful society being suddenly propelled into a situation in which violence was rewarded is provided by the Semai of Malaysia . 

  Many people who knew the Semai insisted that such an unwarlike people could never make good soldiers . 

  Interestingly enough , they were wrong . 

  Communist terrorists had killed the kinsmen of some of the Semai counterinsurgency troops . 

  Taken out of their non-violent society and ordered to kill , they seem to have been swept up in a sort of insanity which they call " blood drunkenness " ... 

  Talking about these experiences , the Semai seem bemused , not displeased that they were such good soldiers , but unable to account for their behaviour . 

  ( Dentan 1968 : 58-9 ) 

  In other words , the Semai had always been capable of violence , but this capability had never had any meaning . 

  Even after the fact , their violent behaviour just did not make sense . 

  The Buid and Semai examples should also serve as a caution against theories about violence and aggression which treat them as typically involving a contest between two balanced opponents competing for access to a scarce resource . 

  In most of human history , including the modern period , the most significant types of violence involve the institutionalized oppression of a weaker group ( gender , class , ethnicity , nation ) by a stronger one . 

  Warfare , preparations or war , and negotiations for " peace " by the lites of opposing stratified social formations often distract attention from , and may be meant to distract attention from , the permanently installed violence perpetrated by dominant strata against subordinate strata within each formation ( see Chomsky 1987 : 105-6 ) . 

  ) 1989 Thomas Gibson 

  NOTES 

  1 

  The writing of this paper was made possible by a grant from the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation . 

  I should also like to thank Anthony Carter and Grace Harris for their careful commentaries on this paper . 

  Any remaining confusions are my own . 

  2 

  One of the problems with Heelas' excellent discussion ( this volume ) is that while he develops the ambiguities concerning intentionality in our own concept of " aggression " very well , he does not seem to recognize that this may be a very general feature of related concepts in other cultures . 

  Another problem is that he does not deal with the fact that an " intent to harm " may itself be ambiguous : in certain contexts , it may be seen as a good thing , in others as bad . 

  Indeed , I believe the Buid to be highly unusual in their condemnation of aggression in their dealings with all but the animal and spirit worlds . 

  ( There are signs that they are beginning to view it as legitimate , in theory , in their dealings with Christian lowlanders , although they still find it difficult to apply in practice . ) 

  3 

  Notice that the determination of such rates presupposes an understanding of what counts in a culture as " deliberate " , and that a high rate need not necessarily be viewed as a bad thing by the culture concerned . 

  4 

  The Buid attitude toward " kinship " is perhaps as unusual as their attitude toward " aggression " , but that is another paper ( Gibson 1985 ) . 

  5 

  Elsewhere I argue that transactions among the Buid are dominated by a principle not recognized by Polanyi , and that Sahlins' reduction of Polanyi's three categories to a single continuum is even more misleading . 

  Sharing is characteristic of a certain kind of non-competitive egalitarianism because it eliminates the possibility of debt ( cf . 

  Sahlins 1972 : 193-6 ; Gibson 1988 ) . 

  REFERENCES 

  4 

  Chapter Four 

  STYLES OF MANHOOD : an Amazonian contrast in tranquillity and violence 

  JOANNA OVERING 

  INTRODUCTION : MORAL UNIVERSES AND THE BOUNDARIES FOR PEACEFUL AND VIOLENT ACTION 

  The Piaroa , a jungle people who dwell along tributaries of the Orinoco in Venezuela , equate the value judgement of " good " with that of " the tranquil " : both carry the label of " adiwa " . 

  For them , the person of good character has what is said to be the imagination to live tranquilly , or literally " the wizardry to live tranquilly " ( mariya adiunaku ) . 

  The good social life , the Piaroa insist , is the tranquil one where individuals are never coerced by or subjected to the violence of kinsmen and neighbours . 

  Social action among the Piaroa is congruent with their discourse on harmonious existence ; for their evaluative rhetoric is coupled with a social state of extremely peaceful living . 

  Piaroaland is almost free of all forms of physical violence , a place where children , teenagers , and adults alike never express anger through physical means . 

  The Piaroa place immense value upon personal moderation in behaviour and are therefore appalled by most display of excess , especially if violent in intention . 

  This is not to say that the Piaroa have formed a totally peaceful society , and I have written elsewhere ( 1986a ) on their discourse of predation , cannibalism , and revenge . 

  Through sorcery , the Piaroa shaman leader is highly violent on a daily basis toward the end of protecting his community from the dangers of disease and death , both being considered to be attacks by cannibalistic beings from both this and other worlds . 

  A state of violence or peace is always relative and depends somewhat upon the boundaries of the moral universe , but also upon the nature of the moral system at hand . 

  Violence belongs to the domain of foreign politics for the Piaroa , while for their neighbours , the Yanomami , close kin can easily transform into dangerous " others " . 

  A Yanomami may assault , perhaps fatally , a wife , brother , or cousin ( see Lizot 1985 : 45 , 68 , 69ff . ) . 

  The Shavante leader of the Brazilian Amazon may kill a fellow villager whom he views as an intolerable competitor ( Maybury-Lewis 1971 : 186ff . ) . 

  In contrast , the moral universe within which the Piaroa can not inflict violence is very wide , encompassing all of Piaroaland . 

  The Piaroa say that all their deaths are caused by outsiders , and their own powerful revenge rituals are aimed at villages outside of Piaroaland ( Overing 1986a ) . 

  The moral dogma of the Piaroa disallows , then , violence toward anyone who is part of their this-worldly political and social universe , that is , anyone who is not a total stranger . 

  Most important , enemies are not seen . 

  Foreign sorcerers enter Piaroaland in the guise of butterflies ; thus , even those who inflict violence upon Piaroa are unseen in human form . 

  In contrast , for the Yanomami and the Shavante the moral universe within which violence is not allowed slips and slides : today you are a friend , but perhaps tomorrow you are not . 

  Such variation in the conception of stable moral boundaries that delimit friend and extreme otherness reflects the considerable difference between the Piaroa and such groups as the Shavante and the Yanomami in their everyday display of hostilities . 

  Yanomami and Shavante violence occurs within both community and tribal boundaries . 

  The particular contrast between , peaceful and violent action in which I am interested falls outside any simple dichotomy which might distinguish between a state of war and peace . 

  While it is the hostility of " outsiders " that often legitimates violence , the definition of who counts as " outsider " is a highly relative matter , as the cases cited above suggest . 

  Nor is the fashionable " mode of production " argument a likely key to the matter . 

  Despite recent generalizations about the violence and aggression which supposedly typify societies of tropical forest in South America ( see , for instance , Sanday 1981 : 193 ) , these peoples vary considerably in the degree and the kind of violence allowed in everyday life . 

  Yet most would fall into the category of " brideservice society " , a social formation that Collier and Rosaldo ( 1981 : 280 ) have defined as radically different from that of the " bride-wealth society " . 

  These authors argue that in the " brideservice societies " , a category encompassing the relatively egalitarian hunting and gathering peoples and those that have a mixed economy of hunting , gathering , small-scale horticulture , the association of sexuality and violence , which is but a particular type of sexual oppression , plays a central role in all political and much social action . 

  Collier and Rosaldo are linking a particular mode of production ( " brideservice economies " ) with a specific type of politics ( " sexual politics " ) and a particular theory of personhood " ( Man the Hunter , Warrior , Life Taker and Giver " vs . 

  " Woman his Sexy Partner " ) ( see Collier and Rosaldo 1981 : 275-6 , 315 ) . 

  While Collier and Rosaldo have relatively successfully characterized one type of " brideservice economy " , they are too sweeping in their wider generalization ; for brideservice economies are not always associated with the cultural values these authors stipulate . 

  For many groups with such " economies " , community and even intercommunity relations are conceived as properly being harmonious ones ( for example , see the following literature on South America : Santos 1986 on the Amuesha of Peru , Thomas 1982 on the Pemon of Venezuela , and Overing Kaplan 1975 on the contrast in " peaceful " and " bellicose " peoples of the Orinoco Basin at the time of the Conquest ) . 

  The sample of groups used by Collier and Rosaldo , upon which they constructed their model , skewed the data ; for they were all peoples who place immense value upon' Man the Hunter and Warrior' , and who also elaborate ritually upon the violent , destructive , and fertile potential in men . 

  Such values work at the expense of a positive evaluation of females . 

  They also work against a high value being placed upon the creation of peaceful everyday relationships . 

  The remainder of my paper will deal with the extreme contrast between two South American groups , the Shavante and the Piaroa , in their respective valuation of male maturity . 

  The exploration will revolve around the systematic development in youngsters of the desired , and contrasting , characteristics the two valuations entail . 

  For the Shavante , the essence of manhood is what Maybury-Lewis ( 1971 : 268-9 ) summarizes as " sexual bellicosity " , while for the Piaroa it is the ability to co-operate tranquilly with others in daily life . 

  The Piaroa view the arrogant and dominating character , which the Shavante would highly esteem in a mature male , as odious . 

  What is even more striking in these contrasting evaluations of maturity is their treatment of gender . 

  The Piaroa definition of ideal maturity for men is identical to that for women ; but the Shavante define ideal manhood as the achievement of a state that is both opposed and superior to the feminine . 

  Gender antagonism is , therefore , to a certain extent built into the definition of manhood for the Shavante . 

  The flamboyant ritual celebration of male bellicosity and the male collectivity among the Shavante appears to carry with it a corresponding devaluation of women , and indeed to be built upon it . 

  A Piaroa man , on the other hand , must , ideally , co-operate equally well with men and women , and , as is true also for women , achieve harmony in these relationships . 

  Such a difference in conceptions of gender and gender roles has strong implications for the event of peace or friction in the play of daily life , and can not be too much emphasized . 

  It is this issue , the interplay of ideas about gender and gender roles with the creation of discord or harmony in community relationships , about which I shall be concerned below . 

  The focus will be upon systems of morality that vary greatly in their images of manhood and styles of manhood . 

  Much anthropology has been written on the ways in which culture and social rules constrain women . 

  A modern variant of this view is the Marxian argument of Meillassoux , who sees the formation of the sexual division of labour , itself , as entailing the socio-political subjugation of women , making " the woman ( or slave ) a servant of men " ( Meillassoux 1981 : 21 ) . 

  He argues that kinship institutions , such as marriage , conjugality , and paternal filiation , were then imposed upon women by men as the means through which men constrained women to gain control over both the means of reproduction and labour ( ibid . : xxi-xxiii , 20 ) . 

  My concern is to show that , on , the contrary , culture and social rules may well constrain males to fit a given society's ideas about virtuous male behaviour . 

  This is not a merely tongue-in-cheek reaction to such arguments as that of Meillassoux . 

  When the Shavante train boys to become warriors who can both take and give orders , they systematically constrain the youngsters in age-set seclusion for a period of five years during which time they are trained to endure suffering ( see below ) . 

  In contrast to the position taken by Meillassoux above , when I speak of " constraint " my interest is with the overt institutionalization and effects of intentional physical constraint . 

  In a paper on peace and violence this is probably a proper focus , for it is men who are usually in charge of techniques of attack against outsiders . 

  The treatment and definition of enemies are matters forthcoming from the domain of " the political " , which is to a large extent a male domain . 

  Also , it is more than likely the case , however , that how a society designs manners for close personal and social relationships can not be totally separated from its understanding of the " proper " treatment of its enemies . 

  AN IMAGE OF MANHOOD : THE VIRILE SHAVANTE HUNTER AND WARRIOR 

  The Shavante are an Amerindian group of some 2,000 people who dwell in the Mato Grosso of Central Brazil . 

  In terms of dietary needs and actual consumption patterns , they have a gathering economy supplemented by both hunting and horticulture . 

  However , if one looks at Shavante rhetoric and desire , they have a hunting economy . 

  According to Maybury-Lewis ( 1971 : 33-6 ) , the Shavante , both men and women , have a passion for meat , and consider it the prime delicacy : in fact , however , they subsist primarily on wild roots , nuts , and fruits from the collecting trips of women . 

  Hunting , then , serves other needs in Shavante society than just dietary ones . 

  Its technicalities interest the men above all else , and it is the activity upon which they spend most of their energy and about which they talk endlessly ( Maybury-Lewis 1971 : 33 ) . 

  Hunting also provides the men with a public stage for the stylized display of virility . 

  The unsuccessful hunter is met with marked coldness by the women , while the successful hunter flings down his kill for the women to prepare , and with studied indifference goes to lie down . 

  Such a conclusion to a hunting trip is evidence that the man is endowed with proper male virtue . 

  Endurance , fleetness , wakefulness , watchfulness , and bellicosity , all attributes that for the Shavante lead to good hunting , are also indicative of valour , the most esteemed characteristic of Shavante manhood . 

  Collier and Rosaldo ( 1981 : 276 ) have noted that in societies where valour in men is associated with the role of hunter , there is often an ideological linking of hunting , killing , and male sexuality . 

  This is no less the case for the Shavante , as evidenced by their great Wai'a ceremony which , as Maybury-Lewis describes it ( 1971 : 243ff . ) , is a ritual representation of the sexual aspect of male ferocity . 

  Shavante men in this ceremony act out the glorification of the essence of manhood , comprised for them of both the bellicose , destructive aspect of male power and its sexual/ generative side ( ibid . : 266 ) . 

  Ferocity is demonstrated , and the force of it received , through : ( a ) the ritual killing of a mythical , fierce and excellent hunter , ( b ) the ceremonial ( and actual ) rape of women , where a woman from each clan is chosen as object , and ( c ) a ceremonial pantomime of attack which opposes the moieties one to the other : one side in fierce , scowling stamping dance moves against a man of the opposite moiety who must not flinch , even if trampled ( Maybury-Lewis 1971 : 257 ) . 

  As Maybury-Lewis remarks ( ibid . : 66 ) , " the combination of sexuality and aggression could hardly be more aptly expressed than in a ceremonial rape " . 

  The women are also warned by the men that if they , the women , should set eyes on the masks of the ceremony , the men would manhandle , rape , and disfigure them . 

  The ceremony is at its base one that celebrates opposition and division , the division between the genders , between the clans , between the moieties . 

  Through such opposition , men both act out their power and receive it . 

  The institutions of Shavante society are such that women are usually excluded , except as " objects " , from its public aspects . 

  In adulthood , spouses spend little leisure time together : men in leisure , if not at their parental home , spend most such time in the men's house . 

  Women are prohibited from approaching the mature men's council , which takes place daily in the men's house when most decisions about the affairs of the community are made . 

  Women are also excluded from most features of the highly elaborated age-set system . 

  Women have no say in their marriages : often they are married when still babies , or at least by the age of five in a group ceremonial marriage , for youths , held for them at the close of their bachelor hut initiation period . 

  Older men are usually polygynous ; thus a youth rarely has available for marriage an age-mate female , and he must wait for a younger generation of females to mature before cohabitation with them . 

  Much of Shavante life , in Maybury-Lewis's words ( 1971 : 104 ) , " is a function of politics , and Shavante politics is based on competition between groups of males " . 

  Or , as Lopes da Silva observes ( 1986a ) , the Shavante conceive of society through the male model . 

  The characteristics of Shavante leaders are also telling of the value placed upon ferocity in the Shavante ideal of manhood . 

  As is true in general for lowland Amerindian leaders , the Shavante leader has no power of coercion for the organizing of daily economic activity . 

  He can make suggestions and harangue in the man's council meeting , but he can not order people into action . 

  His qualities , nevertheless , are those of the successful hunter/ warrior : he must demonstrate his ideal manliness through self-assertiveness , forceful oratorical skill , athletic prowess , and ceremonial expertise ( Maybury-Lewis 1971 : 198 ; also see Seeger 1981 : 183 on the Suya leader whose temperamental characteristic is that of " uncontrolled belligerence " ) . 

  As is also the case for other Amerindian leaders , he has the responsibility for peace-making . 

  However , if he is a particularly strong leader , the Shavante chief has no compunction in killing factional opponents within his own village . 

  Should he go too far , the only repercussion , so long as he remains powerful , is for some of the village members to leave the village . 

  Belligerence is systematically instilled in males as proper behaviour from a very young age ( the information on the training for proper female maturity is unclear ) , and boys and girls at a very young age are separated from one another as playmates ( also see Lizot 1985 : 39 on the Yanomami , and Seeger 1981 : 155ff . on the Suya ) . 

  Small children are encouraged to be small tyrants , to react violently if thwarted . 

  Yet the scolding and punishment of children are rare ( see Lizot 1985 : 73 on the Yanomami ) . 

  Tantrums by small children are frequent and condoned by parents : Shavante fathers encourage their children to displays of violence against the mother ( Maybury-Lewis 1971 : 71 ) . 

  Children are taught to retaliate any hurt , a " blow for blow " principle ( see Lizot 1985 : 74 on the Yanomami ) . 

  Shavante youths are trained not simply to be warriors , but also to learn co-operation with other men as a group in adversity against other groups of men ( see Seeger 1981 : 155ff . on the Suya ) . 

  To instil the characteristics of the co-operative warrior , the Shavante seclude boys as age-sets for at least five years , during which period they undergo continual harassment and daily haranguing by older men , suffering endurance tests , such as all night exposures and duels at dawn . 

  The boys during this period of seclusion learn athletic prowess and how to display belligerence . 

  Through the lengthy and arduous training during seclusion , they are : ( a ) to develop a lifetime corporate spirit within the group , ( b ) to learn to accept the dominance of older men , and to be prepared in general for ( rather violent ) dominance relationships among men , and ( c ) taught to act violently as a group . 

  This seclusion period is closed by an elaborate ceremony that emphasizes the spatial and emotional removal of young men from the world of women . 

  After this stage , the young men , who are the warriors par excellence , are relatively free of obligation until mature . 

  These young warriors are characterized by Maybury-Lewis ( 1971 : 140-2 ; also see Seeger 1981 : 162 on the Suya ) as exceedingly vain , proud of their bellicosity and beauty . 

  The training for bellicose action nevertheless continues : the mature age grade of men imposes anger and ferocity upon these young men , goading them continually into violent action . 

  In conclusion to this section , the factors internal to Shavante society that contribute to the formation of a particular type of hunter/ warrior complex , one similar to that described by Collier and Rosaldo ( 1981 ) , and to the playing out of violence within the community on a more or less daily basis , and indeed which build such violence into everyday life , can be summarized as follows : 

  1 . 

  the image of ideal manhood is that of the bellicose and handsome hunter/ warrior ; 

  2 . 

  political leadership corresponds to this image ; 

  3 . 

  public leadership in general is associated with the principle of male dominance , of men over men , of men over women ; 

  4 . 

  political ideology is male-biased and associated with the values of male supremacy and ferocity ; 

  5 . 

  women are disallowed from participating in most public decision-making and from the political process in general ; they are associated with the domain of the domestic ; 

  6 . 

  most public co-operation is between men , and not between men and women , or between women ; 

  7 . 

  the genders are systematically separated from an early age ; 

  8 . 

  children are trained into violent reaction ; 

  9 . 

  initiation is focused upon the lengthy constraint of boys , during which period the boys are separated off from female society , taught male solidarity , bellicosity , and endurance , and trained to accept the dominance of older groups of men ; 

  10 . 

  ceremonial displays of male virility , ferocity , and sexuality are highly elaborated , as too is ritual violence against women ; 

  11 . 

  the ritual celebration of fertility focuses upon male generative abilities , and not female ones ; 

  12 . 

  male economic activities and the products of male labour are prized over female economic activities and the products of female labour . 

  In short , the Shavante image of society can almost be equated with the social organization of men , and their notions of personhood with " manhood " . 

  Such an image fits well with the Collier and Rosaldo characterization of a " brideservice society " . 

  None of the above summary statements applies to the Piaroa . 

  AN IMAGE OF ADULTHOOD : PIAROA TRANQUILLITY AND THE MASTERY OF EMOTIONS 

  For the Piaroa , the ideal of man the hunter and sexy warrior is not culturally elaborated , nor is the value of male political supremacy . 

  They do not associate valour with the handsome and arrogant hunter , and young men are taught to pity such evidence of " lack of control " . 

  The Piaroa attitudes toward food reflect their devaluation of the status of the practical hunter . 

  They rely on four food sources , that from garden cultivation , from collecting , from hunting , and from fishing . 

  With respect to desire , they insist on the equal value of products of the hunt and products of the garden . 

  A proper meal , they say , should be comprised of both meat ( the product of men's labour ) and manioc bread ( the product of women's labour ) . 

  For the Piaroa , the ideal of social maturity is the same for men and women ; it is one of controlled tranquillity . 

  The individual , both male and female , is responsible for mastering emotions and the poisonous creative powers within the person which come from the crystal boxes of the Tianawa gods ( see below ) . 

  Through such mastery , the individual can achieve the moderation in behaviour to allow him/ her to lead a tranquil and therefore moral life within a community of relationships . 

  It is through this mastery that one achieves ideal manhood and womanhood in Piaroaland , and through it one can then creatively participate in the building of community . 

  The arrogant and handsome hunter is an image seen to be as disruptive to community relations as that of the " promiscuous woman " . 

  The image that a Piaroa wishes to present to the world is that of' dignified difference' . 

  The Piaroa judgement about the " handsome hunter " is a complex one which can be understood through their theory of knowledge and personhood , a topic for below . 

  Today there are approximately 7,000 Piaroa living in the Amazon Territory of Venezuela . 

  Until about 1970 , the population was highly dispersed with great distances separating both houses and territories . 

  In contrast , life within the multiple-family house was carried out within densely populated spaces . 

  If antagonisms or competition became overt within the house , it disbanded into separate units ( Overing Kaplan 1975 ) . 

  Since 1970 , the Venezuelan government has encouraged the Piaroa to form larger communities in downriver positions closer to the administrative centre . 

  Thus , although I use the present tense , the physical organization of communities and the economic organization that I discuss are more relevant to the pre-1970 period . 

  Each territory , comprising six to seven multiple-family houses , has its own " master of the territory " , who is the ruwang that holds the supreme position in a loose hierarchy of ruwatu ( pl . ) within it . 

  The ruwatu are politico-religious leaders who are basically " men of knowledge " who deal with forces of destruction and regeneration from other worlds . 

  The politicking between the ruwatu is kept at a relatively low-key level , for they rarely meet as a group . 

  Competition among ruwatu between communities is usually expressed through the accusations of sorcery attack , often in the wake of marriages which shift the residential alignments within the territory , and thus respective follower size . 

  While the drama of such shamanic battles can be high , there are many mechanisms that allow for their peaceful resolution ( Overing Kaplan 1975 ; Overing 1985 ) . 

  Competitors are rarely accused of deliberately killing a kinsman , though they might well be accused of inadvertently doing so . 

  Despite the fact of achieved ruwang ship , the Piaroa are relatively speaking highly egalitarian , for they place great value upon personal autonomy . 

  The status labels of " ruwang " and " ruwahu " are the only ones used in reference by the Piaroa outside of kinship terms to think about and to classify social relationships . 

  Typical of Amerindian groups of the Guianas ( see Rivire 1984 ) , Piaroa social life is very unformalized . 

  There are no age sets , no descent groups , no warrior societies , no formal council of mature men , no moiety organizations for the playing out of community life . 

  There exist no mechanisms for corporate group decision-making with regard to disputes or economic matters . 

  Rivire ( 1984 : 4 ) has argued that such informality is a product of the emphasis by the Guianese Amerindian upon the value of individualism . 

  I wish to add , at least for the Piaroa , that their " informality " is also a product of their high valuation of peaceful living . 

  Unlike the Shavante case , leadership pertains not to " manhood " , but to the role of ruwang . 

  In other words , an adult man does not automatically assume a political role on the basis of his gender , any more than does a woman . 

  If one wishes to speak of specifically " political " roles , the divide is between the individual ruwatu and their wives ( ruwahutu ) , on the one hand , and everyone else , on the other ( Overing 1985 ) . 

  However , power in Piaroa social life , as for the universe in general , is highly dispersed and individualized . 

  The community does not hold land in perpetuity : no Piaroa can " own " land , nor can the community . 

  No one , no leader , and no group can order the labour of another , or demand the products of it ( Overing Kaplan 1983/ 4 ) . 

  All products from the jungle are shared equally among members of the large house , while garden products and artifacts are privately owned by the individuals whose labour produces them ( or literally creates them ; see below ) . 

  Loosely organized work parties ( all male , all female , male and female ) within the community characterize economic life . 

  Each woman is mistress of her own fertility for which she alone is responsible : the community has no legal right to her progeny ; nor does her husband if they should divorce . 

  The Piaroa are as allergic to a notion of social " rule " as to the idea of " the right of command " . 

  While there are proper ways of doing things , it is up to the individual to choose or not to choose to do them . 

  The Piaroa emphatically told me that there was no residence " rule " . 

  Although there are kinsmen and in-laws with whom it is proper to live , the final choice is always left to the individual as a private decision . 

  The Piaroa daily express to one another their right to private choice and their right to be free from domination over a wide range of matters , such as residence , work , self development , and even marriage . 

  For the Piaroa , coercion has no place within the domain of the social , including any power a " collectivity " might have . 

  The notion of giving up one's rights to a " whole community " or of submitting to a decision forthcoming from the community or a portion of it would be a strange and abhorrent idea to them ( Overing , in press ) . 

  Sovereignty is in large part in the hands of individuals . 

  Even the gods have no powers of coercion over individuals . 

  Despite the fact that any notion of " the will of the collectivity " would be alien to the Piaroa , the ability to be social is considered to be the most important and valued characteristic of humans living on this earth . 

  According to Piaroa theory , the human condition is unique in that humans are the only beings that are today able to achieve a social life and to live in a community . 

  The Piaroa live on earth beneath " the sky of the domesticated " , and it is the sociality of living in communities beneath this sky that sets humans apart from all others . 

  Only humans can acquire the capacities for creating tranquil and moral ( non-competitive ) relationships of co-operation which allow for the forming of a moral community . 

  Both sociality and the powers to transform the earth's resources for use , powers upon which sociality depends , are capabilities distinct to earthly humans . 

  Achieving the social , then , is the primary goal of the Piaroa community . 

  In great contrast to that type of political thought which equates " the social " with the constraint of a collectivity and with relations of domination , the Piaroa insist upon the opposite where " the social " is viewed as the means through which humans could actively prevent the establishment of ( immoral ) relations of dominance ( Overing , in press ) . 

  The work and the skills for building community are considered to be skills of wizardry ( maripa ) , and each individual acquires such skills , as appropriate to gender , through " lessons in wizardry " ( maripa teau ) . 

  Such skills , which fill one's " beads of knowledge " within the person , are the poisonous creative powers for transformation that come from the crystal boxes of the Tianawa gods . 

  All powers for building community , for reproducing and producing , come , then , from another world , that of the gods . 

  This earthly world was depleted of all powers at the end of creation time history ; after that time the community could only be achieved and continuously recreated through individuals carefully taking , with the help of the ruwatu , limited amounts of transformational forces to do so from the gods . 

  In contrast to peoples who believe that their communities have existence through time through rules of corporation , the Piaroa do not understand " community " and the relationships of which it is comprised as a political given that allows for continuity through time . 

  Rather it is for them a process of , existence that has to be daily achieved by individuals through work , that is through the individual mastery over emotions and the skills of wizardry . 

  The Piaroa , for instance , place emphasis upon marriage ties in the development of community rather than upon the ties of descent . 

  Through marriage and affinity the work of reproduction and production can be achieved . 

  For the Piaroa the social can only be created through the skills and the personal autonomy of individuals . 

  Humans can act as moral , social agents because unlike all other present day beings they acquire both a " life of the senses , or desires " ( kaekwae ) and a full " life of thoughts " ( ta'kwaru ) to be used on earth . 

  Moderation in behaviour , which allows for the ability to interact tranquilly , is achieved by attaining mastery over one's " life of senses " and one's " life of thoughts " ( Overing 1985 ) . 

  Ta'kwanya and ta'kwakomenae are the two components , or forces , of ta'kwaru , " the life of thoughts " , both of which come from the crystal boxes of the gods . 

  Ta'kwanya refers to all those particular cultural capabilities a specific type of people have that enable them to live as they do : it is their means of living and fulfilling their material needs ; it is their way of doing things in the material sense . 

  It is a category that includes both reproductory capabilities and the knowledge and abilities to transform the earth's resources for use : for acquiring food , for making tools , for processing food , for being fertile , for doing ritual . 

  It also includes language and social norms . 

  There is a strong sense of violence attached to the notion of ta'kwanya ; for this category of creative , cultural capability is comprised of poisonous forces and carries with it the idea of predation ( see Overing 1986a ) . 

  For the Piaroa , reproduction , production , and language are all placed on the same level as basically predatory capabilities , or the means for predation . 

  Thus , the transformational capabilities for fulfilling material needs are dangerous to the self if one takes too many of them , and they can be dangerous to others in contact with one . 

  For instance , the transformational forces of men are dangerous for women , and vice versa ; both are dangerous for children . 

  Each person is responsible for preventing his/ her danger to others ( Overing 1986b ) . 

  It is through the other aspect of one's " life of thoughts " , i. e. ta'kwakomenae ( will , rationality , consciousness ) , that a Piaroa acquires the autonomy to " master " within one's self both the dangerous ta'kwanya and one's " life of the senses " . 

  It is through this mastery that one achieves ideal manhood and womanhood in Piaroaland , and can then creatively participate in the building of community . 

  The Piaroa leaders , the ruwatu , take more skills of wizardry within themselves than normal people . 

  They therefore have greater responsibilities than the layman for the building of community . 

  They , for instance , display in self-deportment great tranquillity , or mastery of emotions ; for one of their greatest duties is to create the tranquil relationships which would allow for the work of building community , and therefore for its wealth . 

  Because the ruwang takes more creative capabilities within himself , he is also the most productive member of the community , and the most dangerous . 

  It is he who brings into this world all the powers to be used in it ; at the same time it is he who could become predator through sorcery of his own people ( see Overing 1985 ) . 

  A tranquil demeanour then is also required of the powerful ruwang by the members of his community as evidence of his mastery over his powers and his emotions . 

  A display of too much arrogance or " excessive " behaviour leaves a ruwang sitting alone , with no followers . 

  To sum up , Ta'kwaru , " the life of thoughts " , is a concept about human agency that conjoins within the person a specific culture and the autonomy to use this culture socially in a moral or immoral way . 

  Ta'kwakomenae ( will , etc. ) is that crucial aspect of ta'kwaru that allows for responsible or irresponsible behaviour . 

  It is one's motivation or intentionality in using one's customs ( i. e. one's poisonous capabilities ) ; it is one's comprehension of them , and one's responsibility or irresponsibility for their use , power , and force . 

  Virtue for the Piaroa demands the mastery through the will of both emotions and cultural capability toward the end of achieving social responsibility . 

  LESSONS IN WIZARDRY 

  The skills of wizardry to build community are acquired gradually through life . 

  A child's first lessons occur when she or he is 6 or 7 years old when the ruwang gathers a group of boys and girls together to teach them ta'kwakomena ( consciousness , will , responsibility ) , or basically social morality . 

  They are taught what our moral philosophy calls " the other-regarding virtues " , those that enable one to take responsibility for one's actions towards others ( see Overing 1985 ) . 

  The Piaroa see the virtue of living peacefully with others as more important than " the self-regarding , virtues " ( which in contrast the Shavante favour ) , such as personal courage , ambition , talent , and industry . 

  The ruwang also teaches the children what the Piaroa view as social deficiencies : such traits as ferocity , ill-nature , cruelty , malice , arrogance , jealousy , dishonesty , vanity . 

  The teaching ruwang , then , in these first " lessons in wizardry " teaches the value of mastery over the emotions . 

  However , ta'kwakomena not only refers to responsibility , but to personal autonomy in general . 

  It is therefore the children's own decision which virtues they develop , as too it is a personal decision later which other aspects of knowledge , types of capabilities , one develops ( Overing 1985 , 1988 ) . 

  Before the child is " tamed " through its first ta'kwakomena lessons , it plays with a mixed-gender pack of free-roaming , small children . 

  Since the Piaroa totally disallow physical violence , and children are never physically punished , the children have no model of such action . 

  Their play , although robust , is accompanied by very little obvious dissension . 

  Temper tantrums are discouraged , met by mocking and teasing , and strong anger is expressed by both adults and children through pointed silence ( Overing Kaplan 1975 ; Overing 1988 ) . 

  After the initial " lessons in wizardry " , the child is expected to take increasing responsibility for its actions and to co-operate with others in everyday activities . 

  As children begin to participate in daily tasks , they gradually leave the mixed gender pack of children to join the company of young people who are of their own gender . 

  Boys undergo no period of constraint , in contrast to their lot among the Shavante . 

  The Piaroa have no competitive sports , or ones that require endurance : there is no duelling , wrestling , or log races . 

  Shuttlecock is the only sport I saw teenagers playing . 

  The leisure time of teenage boys is spent wandering in the forest , from house to house , and in hammock gossip . 

  By working unsystematically with adults of their choice , they slowly learn the skills of their choice , those of hunting , fishing , or the making of artifacts . 

  Girls have less leeway than the boys . 

  A young daughter will help her father distribute game or follow her mother into the fields , but by the age of 9 or 10 girls are participating in the total range of tasks normal to female status . 

  Unmarried young people , male and female alike , provide a labour force upon which all adults of the communal house may draw , a preparation for the general co-operation upon which the Piaroa place such value among adults within the community . 

  It is particularly the case with men that they slowly over time increase their knowledge and mastery over self . 

  Many ceremonies for both males and females are privately conducted , often at the most in the company of a ruwang . 

  Marriage as a ritual is a private one between bride and groom , who are usually of approximate age . 

  That such stages in development go relatively unmarked in community ritual is significant as one of the factors contributing to the peacefulness of the Piaroa . 

  Both boys and girls continue their " lessons in wizardry " at puberty . 

  For a woman , her most important acquisition of wizardry are her " beads of menstruation " . 

  The ruwang chants to fill her beads of knowledge with the knowledge of fertility . 

  Menstruation , and the fertility with which it is associated , form a woman's " thoughts " ( her ta'kwanya ) , as similarly hunting and fishing capabilities are the " thoughts " of a man . 

  When a girl receives these " beads of knowledge " from the gods , she then has the power to master her own fertility . 

  It is understood , in Piaroa thought , that women have control over their own biological processes and must take responsibility for them . 

  All boys when about 12 undergo a great increase festival , the Sari , their second " lessons in wizardry " , which gives them the internal clothing of the hunter and fisherman . 

  Far from being distressed by the initiation of the boys , the women as a group ritually congratulate each boy at its close , and praise him . 

  The Sari , however , is not primarily an initiation ceremony ; for it will be held by a great ruwang and his wife ( the ruwahu ) regardless of whether there are boys of appropriate age for initiation . 

  It is at this ceremony that the sacred instruments , which the women must not see , are played . 

  The ruwang , who is with the men outside the house , chants with the ruwahu , who is inside it with the women . 

  In such chants the two leaders re-enact the roles of the creator god of the Piaroa and his sister . 

  Typically for the Piaroa , the women are not warned against seeing the instruments with a threat of rape ; rather , it is said that if a woman should see the flutes , the entire village must commit mass suicide by joining hands and jumping off a cliff ( and I must admit that their reasoning on this is not clear to me ) . 

  However , the Sari , as a great increase ceremony , is one of the most dangerous rituals the Piaroa perform , and , as such , only a great ruwang and his wife may present it . 

  Through his powers , he makes fertile the jungle and rivers : he travels to all the sacred homes of the " parents of the animals and fish " beneath the earth , and transforms the inhabitants of these subterranean villages into the form of animal and fish . 

  He then transports them to earthly space for human use . 

  The ceremony is , then , a demonstration of the " fertility " of the ruwang , and not of Piaroa men in general . 

  The great " secret " of the rituals is that the Piaroa are cannibals ; for the meat they eat each day is human in its origin . 

  After their first " lessons in wizardry " for the hunt , men may undergo , if they wish , more powerful lessons to slowly increase their internal " beads of knowledge " , their source of power as hunter , fisherman , chanter . 

  The most powerful " lessons in wizardry " are those taken for the learning of shamanic powers , and in the Piaroa theory of knowledge , men who do undergo them are the best hunters in Piaroaland , even if they rarely hunt ( Overing 1988 ) . 

  The excellent , practical hunter who has had no further lessons in hunting-wizardry than his introductory ones as a teenager is said to know little about hunting . 

  Thus , for the Piaroa , " hunting " includes all capabilities for acquiring animal meat and for making it edible for human consumption . 

  The hunter who strikes down a wild peccary with a blowgun dart is participating in only one aspect of this process , and the critical role is played by the ruwang . 

  It is the latter who has the transformational capabilities for the very creation of animal meat . 

  The Piaroa consider the most powerful creative capabilities to be those of the woman , who bears children , and those of the ruwang , who transforms humans to animals ( Overing 1986b ) . 

  Thus , the ruwang , who transforms human to animal flesh , who transports it to earth , and then , after earthly kill , transforms the animal flesh into edible vegetable form ( see Overing Kaplan 1975 ) , is the greatest of all hunters . 

  It is through the power of his " thoughts " that the Piaroa ruwang is their great warrior and hunter , while the physical prowess of the practical hunter is considered to be a minor capability , not one to place much value upon . 

  Danger , from the Piaroa point of view , is from the predatory activities of beings from other worlds , and the responsibility for protection from them is in the hands of the shamanic ruwatu . 

  Dealing with outsiders , with the enemy , is the duty of the ruwang , and not of men in general . 

  Therefore , Piaroa boys are not constrained into learning the aggressive stance of young warriors to fight men of this world ; they do not learn to accept the dominance relationships of groups of men over other groups of men . 

  Males are not placed in age sets to mark their development and to rank their status as men : beyond certain learning , all maturity is both a relative and an individual matter . 

  Nor do Piaroa young men learn the self-regarding virtues of manhood that would set them as males against females , and , as such , superior to them . 

  The Shavante have no shamans , and the duty of protection , fighting , and hunting in Shavanteland is carried out through group debate by men and through their physical violence . 

  In Piaroaland , the ruwatu , individually , have the power that men as a group have in Shavanteland . 

  All protection is carried out through the power of the " thoughts " of individuals , and not through the physical bellicosity of men in groups . 

  It might be added as an aside that it probably takes much more cultural energy to teach bellicosity and to produce warriors ( with spears as arms ) , than to teach co-operation and to produce shamans ( with " thoughts " as arms ) . 

  PEACE AND THE DEMARCATION OF " THE OTHER " : A CONCLUSION 

  I began this essay by noting that the moral dogma of the Piaroa disallows violence toward anyone who is part of their this-worldly political and social universe . 

  Beings having the sufficient characteristic of " otherness " to warrant an attack should only be those from other lands or worlds . 

  Indeed , an important aspect of the Piaroa " complex of peace " is the erasure of most marked divisions among people in the playing out of the social life of the community . 

  Their ideal of endogamy , which treats the marriage exchange as if it were non-existent , is an example of such a mechanism for achieving peace . 

  The Piaroa recognize marriage exchange as an exceedingly dangerous principle to act upon , a lesson they receive from the events of the mythic past which was a time when each marriage alliance between strangers carried in its wake a deadly competition for the poisonous cultural capabilities of predation . 

  Through the endogamous marriage the very notion of marriage exchange , and especially its dangerous mixing of strangers , has been masked ( see Overing Kaplan 1972 , 1975 , 1984 ) . 

  There is very little idiom through which a Piaroa can demarcate another Piaroa as " other " than self , and therefore as " outsider " . 

  Although all Piaroa are considered kinsmen , division does exist , of course : there is the factional politicking of the ruwatu ; each individual has dangerous affines , even if they are also kin ; men have different roles to play from women , and because of their difference in cultural capabilities the genders are dangerous for one another , a difference somewhat marked in ritual . 

  However , unlike the Shavante , whose ritual and rhetoric sets into opposition groups and categories of people , and indeed celebrates separation and opposition , Piaroa institutions downplay , ignore , and mask the principles of separation and opposition , principles they associate with relations of dominance and tyranny ( see Overing Kaplan 1981 ) . 

  " Difference " for the Piaroa always signifies a danger : it can easily lead to violence between individuals and therefore be a deterrent to the possibility of creating the sociality necessary for the creation of community . 

  Much of the bread and butter of anthropology , the description of elaborate group organization , rites of initiation , networks of marriage exchanges , the hierarchy of groups , and the ranking of men over women are all mechanisms for stressing the " otherness " among people who daily interact , and , as such , they mark the boundaries within which , and outside of which , daily aggression and domination are played out . 

  Thus , in conclusion , I would like to remark that one reason that descriptions of exceedingly peaceful societies are relatively " thin on the ground " is most likely because the institutions of such societies are not congruent with the Western ( and anthropological ) notions of " the social " . 

  On the other hand , the institutions of the Shavante are but grist for our mill . 

  Their rituals , their rhetoric , their values , and their group organization are familiar to us , while those of the Piaroa are not . 

  ( 3 1989 Joanna Overing 

  NOTES 

  1 

  An assumption in much of the recent literature on gender is that male obligations give men status , while female obligations constrain women . 

  For example , it is argued that boys in initiation receive esoteric privileged knowledge , but girls only suffer prohibitions and restrictions at puberty ( see Bamberger 1974 : 277 ; Ortner 1974 : 69 ) . 

  This is an example of what I have labelled a " Catch 22 " clause that is unfortunately very general to interpretations in gender studies . 

  2 

  It must be admitted that to a certain extent I am presenting a caricature of the Shavante , if for no other reason than I do not know them as well as the Piaroa . 

  The picture I give , however , is , according to a Bororo expert , Sylvia Caiuby Novaes ( personal communication ) , one to which the Bororo , neighbours of the Shavante , also subscribe . 

  In other words , the image I present of the Shavante is the one they choose to present to the world . 

  However , Aracy Lopes da Silva , who has recently done research with Shavante females , tells me that : ( a ) Shavante females have considerable strength within the " domestic arena " , and ( b ) Shavante males are often gentle with women and children when interacting within the domestic field . 

  On the other hand , as Lopes da Silva herself comments ( 1986a ) , with the exception of the public bestowal of the " woman's name " upon the female , women are tied to the domestic , the private , and the individual , while men are associated with the public , the ceremonial , and the political . 

  Also see Lopes da Silva ( 1986b ) . 

  REFERENCES 

  Introduction 

  To the English-speaking world , the Spanish Civil War of 1936-9 is familiar nowadays chiefly through the poetry of W. H. Auden , George Orwell's classic war memoir Homage to Catalonia and , most of all perhaps , Ernest Hemingway's novel For Whom the Bell Tolls . 

  This alone testifies to the passions that the war aroused among non-Spanish contemporaries , for many of whom its significance went well beyond Spain itself . 

  Thousands of foreigners from all parts of the world were so concerned about events in Spain that they actually went there to fight in the war , many of them never to return . 

  For most of these volunteers the war represented a kind of crusade against the greatest evil of the day : fascism , as represented by General Franco's Nationalist rebels and their Italian and German allies . 

  Helping the young Spanish Republic in its struggle for survival against these powerful enemies was , or seemed to be , a way of resisting the advance of a sinister creed and political system which threatened to engulf the whole of Europe . 

  Not all foreigners sympathized with the Republic , however . 

  A smaller number volunteered to assist the rebels , likewise out of a conviction that on Spanish soil a wider struggle was being fought out . 

  For them too -- and for the Nationalists themselves , who adopted the term officially -- this was a crusade , but one on behalf of Christianity against godless " Bolshevism " as incarnate in the Republic's left wing allies and Soviet backers . 

  It is quite understandable that contemporaries , whatever their sympathies , should have viewed the Spanish Civil War in such cosmic terms . 

  Whilst the confrontation between the Spanish Republic and its right-wing opponents may have differed in significant respects from the events surrounding the death of democracy in , for example , Italy , Germany and Austria -- not least because in Spain there was a three-year civil war -- the underlying similarities were real enough . 

  It is nevertheless important to recognize that the conflict was in no serious sense the product of forces extraneous to Spain . 

  The Spanish Civil War , in origin and essence , was precisely that : a civil war arising out of Spanish conditions and , notwithstanding the foreign contribution , fought overwhelmingly between Spaniards . 

  Political regimes may come and go ; coups d'tat may be commonplace ; but major civil wars like that in Spain , involving hundreds of thousands of casualties , are mercifully rare . 

  The Spanish crisis of the 1930s therefore presents the historian with fascinating and difficult questions . 

  Why , for example , did the Spanish democracy born in 1931 not endure ? 

  What made it so difficult for Spaniards during the 1930s to coexist peacefully ? 

  Even given their failure to do so , why was the outcome a protracted civil war ? 

  Why did victory in the war go to Franco and the Nationalists ? 

  Were left-wing contemporaries correct in considering their enemies " fascists " ? 

  These are among the questions that this pamphlet will attempt to tackle . 

  First , however , we must examine how and why Spain became a democracy in 1931 . 

  From monarchy to Republic 

  In 1898 Spain suffered at the hands of the upstart United States a humiliating military and naval defeat in the Caribbean and Pacific . 

  Defeat was followed by a yet greater humiliation : Spain's loss of the final remnants -- Cuba , Puerto Rico and the Philippines -- of a vast overseas empire , conquered during the sixteenth century and still intact as late as the early nineteenth . 

  The material loss suffered in the " Disaster of 1898 " was significant , but the psychological blow was even greater . 

  As Spaniards came face to face with their country's impotence , backwardness and inescapably second-class status , there arose a confused chorus of demands for the " regeneration " of what was widely seen as a " decadent " nation . 

  For the Spanish monarchy , 1898 signalled the start of a lengthy process of disintegration which culminated in 1931 with its replacement by the Second Republic . 

  The old regime 

  Decadent or not , Spain in the early twentieth century was certainly backward in relation to other European states : not merely Britain , Germany and France but also the more obviously comparable Italy . 

  One measure of this was the overwhelmingly rural-agrarian character of her economy and society . 

  Even by 1930 , 46 per cent of the active population was still directly involved in agriculture , and at least another 10 per cent in essentially rural industries . 

  Truly " modern " industry was largely restricted to the northern periphery -- the textile factories of Catalonia and the iron , steel , shipbuilding and paper industries of the Basque country . 

  Only here , and in mining districts like Asturias , could there be said to exist a modern bourgeoisie and an industrial working class . 

  Elsewhere , Spain's was not only an agrarian economy but also a very retarded and unproductive one , upon which was founded an often staggeringly unjust society . 

  Of Spain's complex agrarian problems , two are of particular importance to us . 

  Characteristic of large areas of southern Spain , notably the regions of Andalusia , Extremadura and La Mancha , were the vast private estates or latifundios , often owned by absentee proprietors and usually worked by armies of desperately impoverished landless labourers . 

  In many other regions , especially north of Madrid , peasant farming was more typical ; here the small farmer , either as proprietor or tenant , struggled under the burden of such problems as poor soil , debt , tiny and often scattered holdings , unavailable or expensive credit , high rents and insecure leases . 

  Not surprisingly , rural unrest , frequently suppressed by the ruthless Civil Guard , was a chronic feature of Spanish life , and the " agrarian question " a major concern of those who sought to make Spain more modern and democratic . 

  Would-be reformers were also preoccupied by two powerful institutions which seemed to epitomize and reinforce Spain's general backwardness . 

  The Spanish Church , although forced by nineteenth-century liberal governments to release most of its vast landed wealth , remained during the early twentieth century a rich , powerful and traditionalist institution whose ties with the wealthy classes , moreover , were becoming closer . 

  Through its near monopoly of education the Church instilled into those who did not rebel against it a profoundly conservative system of religious , social and political values . 

  The second institutional prop of conservative Spain was the army : an absurdly over-officered and militarily inefficient body , acutely sensitive to criticism and , after 1900 , increasingly inclined towards interfering in politics . 

  Over Spain's stuttering economy and unequal society there presided the so-called " Liberal Monarchy " . 

  Introduced in 1875 following seven years of political and social instability , this regime brought a generation of political peace based upon the dominance of big landowners , especially the landlords of Castile and the " latifundists " of Andalusia . 

  By the turn of the century the landed class had been joined in a powerful ruling oligarchy by the representatives of " new " economic forces , principally the bankers and heavy industrialists of the Basque country and the manufacturers of Catalonia . 

  Political stability was ensured by a superficially representative electoral system -- Spain received universal manhood suffrage in 1887 -- which in reality was far from democratic . 

  By subjecting voters to a combination of bribery , economic pressure and downright coercion , the Ministry of the Interior and , at local level , caciques -- bigwigs and political " bosses " -- constructed pre-arranged governmental majorities for one or other of the two main " oligarchic " parties , the Liberals and the Conservatives . 

  For many who in the early twentieth century longed for the " regeneration " of Spain , the phrase " oligarchy and caciquismo " summed up the country's ills . 

  The crisis of the monarchy 

  Between 1898 and 1923 the development of a more complex and less easily controlled society confronted the monarchy of King Alfonso XIII with a series of new challenges . 

  Educated , urban Spaniards demanded institutional and constitutional reforms , some going so far as to favour the monarchy's replacement by a republic ; in Catalonia and the Basque country , where distinctive languages and cultures existed , rising nationalist movements opposed the regime's centralizing character ; in Morocco , Spain and her army became embroiled in what was to be her last colonial war ; and two mass forces of the left , socialism and anarchism , emerged to offer organized protest against the injustices of Spanish society . 

  As time passed and urban politics , at least , became more open and genuinely representative , the old , artificial party system began to crumble and the Liberal Monarchy itself to appear insecure . 

  In a major crisis in the summer of 1917 , some historians believe , only divisions between its middle-class and left-wing critics rescued the crown from a fate similar to that which only months before had befallen Tsar Nicolas II of Russia . 

  The immediate crisis passed , but during the next six years the monarchy's problems if anything intensified , with military humiliation in Morocco and social unrest raging in the emerging anarchist strongholds of urban Catalonia and rural Andalusia : all this against a background of chronic governmental instability . 

  By the early 1920s it was evident that the monarchical system in its existing form was ill-equipped to negotiate successfully the difficult transition from " oligarchic " liberalism to genuine democracy . 

  The life of the Liberal Monarchy effectively ended in September 1923 with the military pronunciamiento ( coup d'tat ) of General Miguel Primo de Rivera . 

  With the King's acquiescence and in total contravention of the monarchy's constitution , Primo de Rivera proceeded to establish a dictatorship . 

  While this may have appeared to solve the monarchy's immediate problems , in the long run it only made them worse . 

  After an early honeymoon period during which he drove underground the anarchist trade union , the CNT , suppressed Catalan nationalism , brought peace to Morocco , and benefited from a shortlived economic boom , Primo de Rivera's credit gradually exhausted itself . 

  In the face of rising popular hostility , and abandoned during the late 1920s by most of his powerful allies -- the wealthy classes , his military colleagues and , crucially , Alfonso XIII himself -- the dictator surrendered power in January 1930 , bequeathing to the King the task of determining Spain's future constitutional course . 

  During the next twelve months Alfonso entrusted the premiership first to another general , Berenguer , and then to an admiral , Aznar , each governing without parliamentary restraint . 

  It was becoming increasingly clear , however , that continued recourse to dictatorship offered no lasting solution and that a return to representative politics would somehow have to be contrived . 

  This would not be easy , for beneath the surface of the dictatorship Spanish politics had been undergoing a dramatic transformation . 

  The old Liberal and Conservative parties , moribund even before 1923 , failed to re-emerge in recognizable and credible form in 1930 . 

  Nevertheless they had not yet been superseded by new organizations capable of combining loyalty to the monarchy with the representation of the socially and economically powerful . 

  Ironically , moreover , the dictatorship , while accelerating the inexorable demise of the " oligarchic " party system , had stimulated the growth of socialism and republicanism . 

  The Spanish Socialist Party and its trade union organization , the UGT ( General Workers' Union ) , had gained strength both from initially co-operating with the dictatorship and from subsequently opposing it . 

  The rise of republicanism was if anything even more dramatic . 

  A cause in the doldrums following the chaotic experience of the First Republic in 1873 , republicanism had begun to revive after 1900 , especially in the big cities . 

  Alfonso XIII's complicity in the dictatorship and undermining of the monarchy's own constitution tarnished the very principle of monarchy and gave republicanism a tremendous boost , especially once Primo de Rivera's early popularity had deserted him . 

  During the late 1920s republican ranks swelled not only with members of an expanding , educated urban middle class but also with recently active monarchists . 

  For most of the former , republicanism involved a commitment to fundamentally reforming Spanish society ; for many of the latter , little more than a conviction that a republic , if politically moderate , might prove a sounder guarantor of conservative interests than a discredited monarchy susceptible to outright revolution . 

  As the King and his ministers struggled to escape the constitutional impasse , the seriousness of the republican challenge became daily more evident . 

  In August 1930 representatives of republican organizations signed a pact at San Sebastin aimed at overthrowing the monarchy ; in October the Spanish Socialist Party joined the republicans in a " Revolutionary Committee " ; and in December a premature and unsuccessful rising of pro-republican army officers in Jaca ( Aragon ) provided the cause with its first " martyrs " . 

  Fearing further unrest Alfonso's government accepted the need for an electoral strategy and called local elections as the first stage in a gradual return to representative politics . 

  Held on 12 April 1931 the contest turned into a more-or-less direct confrontation between monarchists and an alliance of republicans and socialists . 

  In the countryside comfortable monarchist victories were achieved through the continuing social and political grip of caciquismo , but in the great majority of cities and large towns , where voting was freer , the triumph of the monarchy's opponents was resounding . 

  To the King and most of his advisers the verdict was clear and , short of risking civil war , irresistible . 

  On 14 April 1931 , as Alfonso XIII prepared his departure from Spain , the Revolutionary Committee assumed office as the Provisional Government of the Second Republic . 

  The Second Republic and the coming of civil war , 1931-6 

  Political and social forces 

  The Provisional Government , having assumed power in extraordinary circumstances , lacked strict democratic legitimacy until a general election could take place . 

  The first of the Second Republic's three general elections was held in late June 1931 . 

  In order to weaken caciquismo and encourage broad political alliances , multi-member constituencies and a new voting system were introduced . 

  The contest produced a " Constituent " parliament ( Sp . 

  Cortes ) overwhelmingly dominated by parties sympathetic to the new regime . 

  Out of 470 seats the Socialists won 113 , the Radicals 89 , the Republican Left 85 , the Catalonian and Galician allies of the latter 55 , and other assorted pro-republicans around 60 . 

  In part this dramatic result reflected a widespread but not necessarily dependable willingness to give the Republic a chance , in part the temporary demoralization and organizational unpreparedness of the anti- and non-republican right , whose fifty or so deputies seriously under-represented its true strength and potential . 

  Between 14 April 1931 and September 1933 , Spain was governed by a succession of governments made up of Republicans and Socialists . 

  Until late 1931 all forces favourable to the new regime were represented in government , ranging from the Socialist Party , through an assortment of Left-Republican parties , to the increasingly conservative Radical Party and the Catholic Republicans on the right . 

  With the resignation of Catholic ministers in October 1931 and the shift into opposition of the Radicals two months later , power reverted to a coalition of Left-Republicans and Socialists led by the Republic's strongman , Manuel Azaa . 

  REPUBLICANISM AND THE SPANISH MIDDLE CLASS 

  The coming of the Republic was not a " bourgeois revolution " involving the seizure of political power by representatives of a " progressive " , entrepreneurial middle class . 

  Spain's financial and industrial bourgeoisie had decades before 1931 thrown in its lot with the monarchy and the landed class ; as an immediate and massive flight of capital indicated , business interests substantially shared the suspicion , if not downright hostility , with which large landowners from the outset regarded the new regime . 

  Most of the Republican politicians who assumed office in April 1931 represented instead that professional middle class and intelligentsia -- lawyers and bureaucrats ; literati and journalists ; academics and schoolteachers ; doctors , dentists and vets -- which had largely abandoned the monarchy during the 1920s . 

  Although in an economically backward country like Spain these elements played an important cultural role , they lacked economic " muscle " , a weakness that was accordingly transmitted to the Republic itself . 

  As a predominantly middle-class cause , Spanish republicanism , and in particular its more reform-minded elements , suffered from the lack of a truly broad popular base , comparable with that enjoyed by French republicanism , within a numerous and vigorous lower-middle class and peasantry . 

  Throughout much of urban Spain the lower-middle class , whilst larger than is sometimes suggested , was engaged in relatively small-scale economic activities involving little in the way of enterprise : family-based manufacturing , localized commerce , a primitive service sector , and not least important the buying , selling and leasing of land -- a major middle-class preoccupation since the disentailment of the Church's landed property in the mid-nineteenth century . 

  Although sections of this lower-middle class were progressively inclined and thus , initially at least , sympathetic towards the Republic , much of it remained highly traditionalist in outlook , devoutly Catholic , exaggeratedly status-conscious towards the working class , and bitterly hostile towards anything which smacked even vaguely of " socialism " . 

  All this was even more true of the middling and lesser landowning and rent-paying peasantry , caught as many of its members were within a web of economic , cultural and ideological subjection to their social superiors and an authoritarian Church . 

  Only in industrialized Catalonia , in Madrid , and to a lesser extent in other big cities like Valencia and Seville , did the makings of a genuine mass , lower-middle-class base for republicanism clearly exist in 1931 . 

  As well as being deficient in mass support , the Republican politicians who numerically dominated the Provisional Government lacked unity amongst themselves . 

  The provisional premier and future President of the Republic , Alcal Zamora , and the Interior minister , Maura , were wealthy , Catholic ex-monarchists anxious to assuage conservative fears with a mildly reformist but politically moderate Republic . 

  The radical Party , led by an elderly , reformed ex-demagogue , Alejandro Lerroux , was Spain's oldest surviving Republican party . 

  By now Radical in name only , the party found its ambitions satisfied by the mere arrival of a Republic ; forthwith it began to offer a refuge to former monarchists and adopt increasingly conservative positions on social issues . 

  Left-republicanism was represented by a number of parties : the Catalan Left and the Galician autonomists , the Radical-Socialists and Azaa's Republican Action party . 

  While differing over details of policy , the Left-Republican parties shared a common desire to liberate the minds of Spaniards from the centuries-old chains -- as they saw it -- of traditionalism and religious obscurantism . 

  The result was an excessive emphasis on anticlericalism . 

  SOCIALISM AND ANARCHISM 

  From the outset their lack of an independent popular base forced Azaa and the Left-Republicans to lean for both electoral and parliamentary support upon the Socialist Party , which through the UGT was able during 1930-1 to mobilize on the Republic's behalf a large proportion of the Spanish working class . 

  Until the 1930s the Socialist Party , its Marxist programme notwithstanding , had been generally cautious and reformist , while the UGT , strongest in Madrid , the Basque country and the mining region of Asturias , had traditionally been an organization of moderate skilled workers . 

  From 14 April 1931 down to September 1933 the Socialists held three ministerial portfolios : Indalecio Prieto occupied the Finance ministry in the Provisional Government and later the Ministry of Public Works ; Fernando de los Ros was Minister of Justice ; and the Ministry of Labour was occupied throughout by the general secretary of the UGT , Francisco Largo Caballero , a former plasterer who had left school at seven and was later to be Prime Minister of the wartime Republic . 

  Socialists differed among themselves over how far their party's commitment to the Republic should go , some looking merely to strengthen " bourgeois democracy " while others regarded the Republic as the anteroom to socialism . 

  Few , certainly , espoused revolutionary ideas in 1931 ; the party's immediate task , it was generally agreed , was to press for legislation aimed at assisting the working class and , in particular , the impoverished landless labourers of the south . 

  Spanish socialism was unique in Europe in 1931 in having to face serious anarchist competition for the allegiance of workers and poor peasants . 

  The anarchist , or more accurately anarcho-syndicalist , CNT ( National Confederation of Labour ) had been founded in 1910-11 ; its main bastions were Catalonia , where socialist strength in the working class was virtually non-existent ; Andalusia , where anarchism drew vigour from a long tradition of rural insurrectionism and millenarianism ; Zaragoza ; and parts of Asturias , Valencia and Galicia . 

  Although chiefly associated in the public mind with acts of individual and collective violence , the CNT was a complex phenomenon . 

  Broadly speaking , anarchists opposed political activity -- parties , elections and parliaments -- in favour of sustained trade-union struggle , faith in spontaneous revolution , and the idea of a revolutionary general strike . 

  Rejecting all imposed authority and all forms of state , they embraced instead the vision of a post-revolutionary society that would be fully decentralized and truly self-regulating . 

  Nevertheless in practice the CNT encompassed a wide variety of positions : dedicated anarchists both violent and pacific ; trade-union reformists ; and large numbers of workers who were trade-unionists first and anarchists very much second . 

  The CNT's response to the coming of a Republic was confused . 

  Despite its official view that all states , republican as well as monarchic , were equally repressive and repugnant , its members were at first by no means implacably hostile to a regime which promised 

  to inject an air of greater freedom into Spanish life . 

  The possibility of the CNT's evolving in a more moderate direction , if not a strong one , certainly existed . 

  However early clashes with the new authorities -- desperate not to appear " soft " on law and order -- and the Socialist Party's clear determination to use its power to weaken its rival soon alienated the CNT from the Republic . 

  Well before the end of 1931 radical elements within the organization had swept moderates aside and launched the CNT on a course of conflict with the Republic . 

  CNT-inspired strikes between 1931 and 1933 frequently gave rise to clashes between workers and the two armed police forces , the Civil Guard and the Republic's new Assault Guard . 

  Anarchist risings in January 1932 , January 1933 and December 1933 , while highly regionalized and easily suppressed , provided evidence of the Republic's failure to embrace a large part of the Spanish lower class and at the same time helped convince many middle-class Spaniards that Republican democracy was the breeding ground of disorder and revolution . 

  REGIONALISM 

  The politics of Spain's new democracy were greatly affected by her regional diversity . 

  In all spheres of politics and legislation , regional variations -- in , for example , landholding systems , types of economic activity , living standards and literacy levels -- complicated the formulation and implementation of policy . 

  Perhaps the thorniest problems of all were those created by the aspirations of regions whose linguistic and cultural identities were actually distinct from those of Spain , or more properly of Castile . 

  The most immediately challenging case was that of Catalonia . 

  This north-eastern region possessed a Romance language quite different from Spanish , a self-consciously " European " culture , and -- by Spanish standards -- a " modern " , industrial economy . 

  Since the mid-nineteenth century there had emerged in Catalonia a vigorous nationalist movement , most of whose protagonists nevertheless sought not separation from Spain but regional autonomy , the defence of Catalonia's distinctiveness and the enhancement of her position and influence within Spain as a whole . 

  Through a wider acceptance of Catalonia's progressive outlook , " Catalanists " insisted , all of Spain might be modernized . 

  By the 1930s the dominant force within Catalanism was the Esquerra , a coalition of democratic and republican groups formed in 1930-1 under the leadership of Francesc Maci . 

  The Esquerra possessed a powerful base of support within the region's urban lower-middle class and among the tenant vine-growers or rabassaires ; through Macia's lieutenant and eventual successor , Lluis Companys , it also strove to maintain working relations with the CNT , whose members , despite their theoretical rejection of politics , sometimes provided it with their votes . 

  The Catalan left's participation in the Pact of San Sebastian bound Spanish Republicans and Socialists , few of whom felt real sympathy towards the idea of regional autonomy , to a policy which was always certain to alienate the Spanish right . 

  Basque nationalism presented the Republic's leaders with different problems . 

  Whilst Catalanism was at least acceptably " progressive " , Basque nationalism was seen by most Republicans and Socialists as " reactionary " . 

  The Basques , a people with a unique , non-Latin culture and , to the majority of Spaniards , an incomprehensible language , were for the most part devoutly Catholic and conservative . 

  The Basque Nationalist Party ( PNV ) added to this general outlook a racial antagonism towards everything Spanish and an abomination of the social , economic and cultural changes affecting the Basque country in the early twentieth century . 

  Large-scale industrialization and urbanization were bad enough as far as most Basque Nationalists were concerned ; even worse was the descent upon their homeland of tens of thousands of " Spanish " immigrant workers , many of whom were affiliated to the Socialist UGT . 

  In 1931 it seemed unlikely that the Republic and the Basque Nationalists would ever be allies . 

  CATHOLICISM AND CONSERVATISM 

  During the Cortes debate on the draft constitution in the summer of 1931 , Azaa declared that Spain had " ceased to be Catholic " . 

  Even if Catholicism had lost its grip on middle-class intellectuals like himself , and on the majority of urban and rural working-class Spaniards , Azaa's statement reflected a serious -- and dangerous -- misreading of the situation throughout much of provincial and particularly rural Spain , where religious devotion remained strong and the Church itself popular . 

  Catholicism as an ideology and the Church as an institution were central to the strength of Spanish conservatism both before and during the Republic , thanks to the power not only of school , pulpit and press , but also of a large and comprehensive network of church-sponsored social , professional and farmers' organizations within which much of the Catholic population was enmeshed . 

  Conservative Republicans like Maura and Alcal Zamora , and even some individuals on the left , recognized the desirability of a modus vivendi between the Church and the Republic , and of the latter's attracting to it the Catholic sectors of the urban middle class and peasantry . 

  Given the intensity of anticlericalism throughout so much of the Spanish left , however , the likelihood of this happening was never great . 

  And although the Vatican was eager for peace with the new regime , powerful figures within both clergy and Catholic laity in Spain assumed from the start that conflict was inevitable and an aggressive posture towards the Republic accordingly required . 

  Catholic insecurity merged with the understandable fears of the wealthy , especially in the countryside , that the Republic would threaten landed property and in general favour the working class and peasantry over the employers and large landowners . 

  With the disintegration of the parties of the old regime , conservatives who were unwilling to embrace the Republic wholeheartedly yet prepared to accept pragmatically the fait accompli of 14 April needed a new political organization . 

  This quickly emerged in the shape of Accin Nacional , founded in late April 1931 as an " electoral organization to bring together the elements of order " . 

  The moving spirits of Accin Nacional were devout Catholics associated with the powerful lay organization Catholic Action and with the important Madrid newspaper El Debate , which on 14 April had advocated obedience to the de facto regime . 

  Obedience did not imply approval , however . 

  Accin Nacional propounded an " accidentalist " attitude towards the Republic , involving a willingness to work within Republican democracy without accepting its permanence ; regimes , accidentalists insisted , should be judged not by their form , monarchical or republican , but by their " content " . 

  Since the Republic's " content " was almost certain to include anticlericalism and social radicalism , such statements were less flexible than they were calculated to sound . 

  Accin Nacional initially provided a temporary home not only for realists like the Salamanca lawyer Jos Maria Gil Robles , who in his memoirs ( published thirty years later ) was to admit to always having been " a monarchist at heart " , but also for monarchist die-hards . 

  As the months passed , however , the latter withdrew to pursue their goals separately . 

  In April 1932 Accin Nacional was renamed Accin Popular ; a year later this in turn became the core of a new mass Catholic-conservative party , the CEDA ( Spanish Confederation of Autonomous Right-wing Groups ) . 

  The CEDA , under Gil Robles' leadership , drew much of its strength from the network of Catholic organizations referred to earlier , most notably the CNCA ( National Catholic-Agrarian Confederation ) . 

  Its success -- when founded it claimed over 700,000 members -- reflected the failure of conservative Republicans to bring Spanish Catholics into the bosom of the Republic . 

  THE EXTREME RIGHT 

  The willingness of so many conservative Spaniards , rich and not so rich alike , to embrace " accidentalism " condemned the extreme , openly anti-republican right to a state of deceptive weakness between 1931 and 1933 . 

  Nevertheless its three principal currents -- Alfonsine monarchism , Carlism and undisguised fascism -- were in the long run to play an important role in the destruction of Spanish democracy and the creation of the dictatorship that replaced it . 

  The oldest of the three by far was Carlism , a popular cause built around a dynastic dispute within the Spanish royal house of Borbn . 

  By the 1930s Carlism had behind it a century's experience of political and military struggle against Spanish liberalism . 

  Once widespread throughout much of northern Spain and embracing , among other things , rural and small-town resistance to centralization , capitalism and modernity , by 1931 it had shrunk in numbers and become an unambiguously reactionary movement of the Catholic right . 

  The sudden arrival of the Republic , with its liberal and anticlerical atmosphere , probably saved Carlism from extinction ; certainly the cause now began to revive , expanding beyond its stronghold in Navarre into other regions , adopting a militantly anti-republican stance , and eventually developing a formidable paramilitary organization , the Requet . 

  The Alfonsists , die-hard supporters of the exiled King , could command little popular support ; they were , as one Carlist taunted them , a " general staff without an army " . 

  Their influence was nevertheless far greater than numerical weakness might suggest , thanks to their individual wealth and their connections with powerful financial , industrial and landowning interests . 

  Through their press and journals , through such political organizations as Renovacin Espaiola , founded in early 1933 , through their nurturing of Spanish fascism and subversion of the officer corps , the Alfonsists played an important part in undermining Spanish democracy and creating the ideological foundations of the Franco regime that emerged out of the Civil War . 

  While many Alfonsists became increasingly attracted to fascism after 1931 , openly fascist organizations made little headway in Spain before 1936 . 

  The JONS ( Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista ) , founded late in 1931 by Ramiro Ledesma and Onsimo Redondo , and the Falange ( Phalanx ) , founded in autumn 1933 by Primo de Rivera's son Jos Antonio , attracted little popular support before -- or even after -- their fusion in March 1934 . 

  Part of the reason may have been the " foreignness " of their programmes ; the Falange , despite occasional denials , followed Italian fascism in its exaltation of violence , desire for a totalitarian state , emphasis upon Spain's imperial heritage , and demagogic use of socially radical rhetoric to appeal to the working class . 

  More important , however , was the fact that for the time being other parties of the right -- the Carlists and especially the CEDA -- commanded the support of those to whom fascism might otherwise have hoped to appeal . 

  As 1936 was to prove , however , for very many Spaniards the choice of accidentalism over fascism was a matter of tactics rather than conviction . 

  Problems , policies and achievements 

  The Second Republic presented a serious challenge to the financial landholding and industrial oligarchy which still , in 1931 , effectively controlled Spain . 

  The challenge was only slightly weakened by the divergent preoccupations of middle-class Republicans and Socialists , the former stressing institutional reform and a transformation of social values and attitudes , the latter the redistribution of wealth , property and economic power . 

  The problems facing a reforming democracy in Spain during the early 1930s were nevertheless enormous . 

  In April-May 1931 , when conservative forces were at their most vulnerable , the Provisional Government , conscious of lacking a clear mandate until a general election had been held , shrank from attempting a " revolution by decree " . 

  Nor , at this stage , was there the slightest question of any social revolution from below ; change , Republicans and Socialists agreed , should come democratically . 

  Spain's dominant classes were therefore permitted the time and opportunity for marshalling their powerful opposition to the very measures that were intended to weaken them . 

  Democratic reforms , certain to be costly , were rendered all the more difficult by the meagreness of the economic resources commanded by the Spanish state , given the ludicrously low level of direct taxation inherited from the monarchy , and by short-term problems arising from the world depression . 

  CHURCH , SCHOOL AND ARMY 

  The constitution of the Second Republic , passed in December 1931 after prolonged and sometimes heated parliamentary discussion , reflected the concerns of the Republican-Socialist alliance which , under Azaa's leadership , was to govern Spain until September 1933 . 

  While the affirmation that Spain was a " Republic of workers of all classes " and clauses limiting absolute property rights bore a socialist ring , the prevailing tone was that of Left-republicanism . 

  This was particularly true in the religious sphere . 

  The constitution , after declaring that Spain no longer possessed an official religion , committed the Republic to recognizing freedom of worship , legalizing divorce , ending state support for the salaries of clergy , dissolving the Jesuit Order and nationalizing its property , and excluding other religious orders from participation in industry , commerce and education . 

  These clauses unilaterally abrogated Spain's 1851 Concordat with Rome and , when carried into law during the next eighteen months , signalled an all-out legislative assault upon the Church's influential position within Spanish life . 

  Outraged by the constitution's anticlericalism , the Catholic ministers in the Provisional Government , Alcala Zamora and Maura , resigned in October 1931 . 

  Relations between the Catholic Church and the new regime had begun to deteriorate even before the constitutional debate opened . 

  Negotiations between the Republic and the Vatican languished ; many Spanish bishops , including the primate , Cardinal-Archbishop Segura of Toledo , made little attempt to conceal their hostility to the Republic , Segura himself being eventually declared persona non grata by the government ; and in May 1931 Catholic sensibilities were outraged when the Provisional Government appeared unwilling to crush an outburst of church-burning and anticlerical violence in Madrid and several southern cities . 

  The constitution guaranteed that church-state relations would remain difficult and that this in turn would imperil Spain's democratic experiment . 

  To those activists of the Catholic right who eventually came together in the CEDA it was an illegitimate document calling for drastic " revision " ; more widely it helped to render the passive majority of Spanish Catholics immune from the appeal of conservative Republicanism and drive them into the CEDA's welcoming embrace . 

  Republicans were particularly concerned that the Church's educational role should cease and be superseded by a system of free , obligatory and laic education . 

  In the sphere of educational reform the Republican-Socialist alliance moved swiftly . 

  Some success was achieved in the primary field , where large numbers of new state schools were built and teachers trained . 

  At secondary level , however , where replacement of the Church was more problematical , there is little doubt that the ban on church schools , where not flouted , was in the short term harmful to educational provision . 

  Apart from the Church , the institution whose role most perturbed Republicans was the army . 

  Republicans like Azaa , Minister of War before -- and after -- he assumed the premiership in October 1931 , wished to make the army militarily competent and politically neutral . 

  Through a series of reforms , most notably the retiring on full pay of some 8,000 officers , Azaa went some way towards achieving the first of these goals . 

  Political neutrality , without which a militarily improved army was liable to prove more of a threat than a support to Spanish democracy , was quite another matter . 

  Admittedly the army had stood aside as the monarchy fell in April 1931 , but its acceptance of the Republic was anything but unrestrained . 

  Officers took unkindly to being reformed by a self-educated and self-appointed expert in civil-military relations ; many , retired and active alike , began to conspire against a Republic which was increasingly seen to be not only anti-military but also " soft " on the two issues that most obsessed military minds : regionalism and public order . 

  REGIONAL AUTONOMY 

  Despite the centralist tendencies of most non-Catalan Republicans and Socialists , the Republican-Socialist alliance could not escape its commitment to Catalan autonomy . 

  The obligation arising from the Pact of San Sebastian was reinforced during the early days of the Republic , when the Esquerra leader , Maci , was only persuaded to withdraw his proclamation of a " Catalan Republic within a Spanish Federal Republic " by the promise of early action on the autonomy issue and the immediate concession of a regional government , the Generalitat ( Sp . 

  Generalidad ) . 

  This body , dominated by the Esquerra , proceeded to supervise the drafting of a Statute of Autonomy which was endorsed overwhelmingly by a plebiscite of the Catalonian population on 2 August 1931 . 

  The principle of regional autonomy having been legitimized in the Republican constitution , the Statute was finally approved by the Cortes in September 1932 . 

  Although in some areas the respective powers of the Generalitat and the Spanish state remained unclearly demarcated , with serious consequences in 1934 , in general the Statute represented a balanced and satisfactory resolution of a complicated and sensitive issue . 

  Its opponents , however , were unlikely to let the matter rest where it stood in September 1932 . 

  For while many Catalans may have felt that the Statute , especially in the financial sphere , went nowhere near far enough , the political right and much of the officer corps were incensed at what they considered the dismembering of the Spanish " Fatherland " . 

  The Basques' progress towards autonomy was sluggish . 

  Where the Esquerra's left-of-centre credentials made Catalan autonomy seem " safe " to the Madrid government , the PNV's fervent Catholicism and general conservatism provoked Republican fears that an autonomous Basque region might become a base for right-wing subversion : what the Bilbao Socialist , Prieto , called a " Vaticanist Gibraltar " . 

  Republican suspicions were confirmed when the PNV , in pursuing autonomy , at first collaborated with the region's Carlists , the most inveterate enemies of Spanish liberalism . 

  During the course of 1931-2 , however , the Basque Nationalists yielded to pragmatism ; appreciating that autonomy would only be possible if acceptable to those wielding power in Madrid , they effectively surrendered their more extreme goals , abandoned their right-wing allies , and moved closer to the Republicans and Socialists . 

  Even so , Basque autonomy was still a long way from being achieved when , during 1933 , the left's grip on power started to loosen . 

  LAND REFORM 

  For the Socialists , the Republic's most important duty was to improve the lot of Spain's rural poor : a sincere commitment greatly reinforced by a radical change , dating from the late 1920s and climaxing in 1932-3 , in the character of the UGT . 

  Through an explosive expansion , especially in southern Spain , of its rural labourers' section , the FNTT ( National Landworkers Federation ) , the UGT was suddenly transformed from an organization consisting primarily of skilled urban workers into one decisively influenced by the worst-off members of the agricultural labour force . 

  The Socialist leadership's sensitivity to FNTT members' expectations meant that agrarian issues pressed even more urgently upon it than would otherwise have been the case . 

  Well before a bill to tackle the uneven distribution of land could go before the Cortes , Socialist ministers acted to alter the balance of power in rural Spain . 

  Between April and July 1931 Largo Caballero at the Ministry of Labour and Fernando de los Ros at the Justice ministry issued a series of decrees designed to protect the short-term position of tenant farmers and improve the wages , working conditions and bargaining position of rural labourers . 

  The decrees , which later received parliamentary ratification , completely altered the social atmosphere in much of rural Spain and together represented the opening move in a challenge to the control of big landowners . 

  In September 1932 , after several false starts and a tortuous parliamentary process in which the right , despite its numerical weakness , successfully employed filibustering tactics and hundreds of amendments in order to delay and dilute the original bill , an Agrarian Reform Act was finally passed . 

  An Institute of Agrarian Reform was founded to break up large estates and redistribute them to landless labourers . 

  Lacking adequate finance , information and technical expertise , and saddled with a piece of legislation riddled with loopholes and contradictions , the Institute was faced with an impossible task and had made little headway by the time the political climate changed in autumn 1933 . 

  FNTT members , restrained by their leaders throughout 1932 despite the slowness of reform and the flagrant defiance by many landowners and rural employers of Largo Caballero's pro-labour measures , were by mid-1933 exhibiting signs of acute frustration and increasing militancy : attitudes shared , of course , by their anarchist counterparts in the CNT . 

  As well as failing to reward its rural working-class supporters , the Azaa coalition proved to have little to offer the large and politically pivotal class of small tenant farmers . 

  Although a Rural Leases Bill designed to benefit tenants was placed before the Cortes , it was only half-heartedly pursued during 1932-3 and sank without trace when Azaa resigned from office in September 1933 . 

  The left's failure to woo with social legislation a class many of whose members it also alienated by its anticlericalism handed them on a plate to its right-wing opponents . 

  THE LIMITS OF DEMOCRATIZATION , 1931-3 

  The arrival of the Second Republic in 1931 undoubtedly created a new political and social atmosphere throughout most of Spain . 

  Not only in large population centres but also in the countryside and small towns , those who had traditionally exercised power found themselves confronted , whether in newly constituted local councils or in the workplace , with a more open and popular style of politics and a more assertive lower class . 

  As the dust created by the collapse of the monarchy cleared , however , it became increasingly apparent to those eager for change how tenacious and resourceful in defending their positions the established ruling classes of Spain were . 

  In the political sphere , some embraced accidentalism and employed the social organizations of Catholicism in order to defend themselves . 

  Others , more cynical , practised " chameleonism " and declared themselves Republicans in the hope of taming the Republic ; most of these attached themselves to the Radical Party , helping to turn it into , in effect , the conservative party of the Republic and increase its already considerable reputation for political and financial corruption . 

  Either way , by 1933 it was evident how successful the holders of local socio-economic power had been in retaining it and in evading or openly flouting unwelcome legislation . 

  Whilst under the protection of a sympathetic government the balance of power had unquestionably shifted perceptibly towards the lower classes , landlords and employers remained sufficiently strong and confident to be poised for a counter-attack should the political climate change . 

  With a Church and an officer corps also little weakened and increasingly hostile towards the Republic , the enemies of reform could be sure of powerful allies . 

  The military revolt of General Sanjurjo on 10 August 1932 may have been premature and unsuccessful , but it was a significant straw in the wind . 

  If for the Spanish right the Republic had confirmed its promise as an uncongenial regime , for sections of the left it had by mid-1933 failed to fulfil hopes of far-reaching and irreversible social reform . 

  Given the problems involved and the limited time available , such hopes were doubtless unrealistic ; the fact remained that , in addition to the constant hostility of the CNT , Azaa and the Left -- Republicans found themselves , by the summer of 1933 , dealing with a Socialist Party gripped by frustration with parliamentary democracy . 

  Impatience with the slowness of parliamentary and bureaucratic procedures , and a growing awareness that in the Spain of the 1930s the mere passage of social legislation did not guarantee its swift and successful implementation , were pushing leftwards not only the FNTT and other elements within the UGT , but also the Young Socialists , elements within the Socialist Party apparatus , and not least Largo Caballero himself . 

  An end to unity on the left , and thereby of its political dominance , was in sight . 

  Polarization , 1933-6 

  The Azaa coalition reached its apogee in late 1932 with the defeat of Sanjurjo's rising and the passage of both the Agrarian Reform Act and the Catalan Statute . 

  Thereafter its fortunes suffered a steep decline . 

  The Casas Viejas incident of January 1933 , involving a massacre of Andalusian villagers by government forces during an anarchist rising , provoked disgust on the left and a cynical outcry on the right , and began an eight-month process of governmental demoralization and disintegration . 

  In April , a month after the " moderate " right had come together in the ominously powerful and well-financed form of the CEDA , local elections provided encouragement both for the right and for a Radical Party now hungry for power . 

  During the summer , the leftward drift of the Socialist Party quickened ; although most Socialists continued to defend the Republic , faith in continued collaboration with non-Socialists was diminishing . 

  Azaa a finally resigned in September 1933 , following defeat for the government parties in elections for the Republic's supreme court . 

  Interim power now passed to the Radicals , pending a general election . 

  This was held on 17 November 1933 , women voting for the first time . 

  With the Socialists in most constituencies opting to go it alone in pursuit of an overall majority , the left was now divided . 

  Unlike 1931 , moreover , when many anarchists had cast votes in favour of Republican parties , the CNT adopted a policy of systematic abstention . 

  The result was a shattering defeat for both elements of the Azaa coalition : Socialist strength was reduced to 58 seats and that of the entire Republican Left to 38 , of which 22 represented Catalonia . 

  In a triumph for the centre and right , the chief victors were the CEDA ( 117 seats ) and the Radicals ( 104 ) ; some forty seats went to the extreme right of Carlists and Alfonsists . 

  The Republic's ability to absorb the effects of dramatic electoral and governmental shifts was about to be tested . 

  DEMOCRACY ON THE DEFENSIVE , 1933-4 

  Although as the largest parliamentary party the CEDA might have expected to dominate government after the November 1933 election , this was ruled out by the President of the Republic , Alcal Zamora , on grounds of the CEDA's non-republicanism . 

  No doubt the President was , as his right-wing critics charged , jealous of the CEDA leader , Gil Robles , whose swift rise to prominence underlined his own failure to lead Spanish Catholics into the Republican camp . 

  His suspicions of the CEDA were nevertheless genuine and , given its refusal to abandon accidentalism and wholeheartedly embrace the Republic , reasonable . 

  Power therefore passed to the Radicals , who for the next two years dominated a series of coalition governments of increasingly right-wing complexion . 

  CEDA support was essential throughout ; in October 1934 three CEDA ministers finally entered the cabinet , and between May and September 1935 the number rose to five . 

  On the Spanish left the period between the November 1933 election and the end of 1935 became known as the bienio negro , the " two black years " , during which the reforms of 1931-3 were reversed or flouted , socio-economic power reverted sharply to landlords and employers , the left itself experienced unprecedented repression and the seeds of civil war were decisively sown . 

  Historians have disagreed concerning how far the legislative record of the Radical-led but CEDA-manipulated administrations of these years should be regarded as deliberately undoing the work of 1931-3 in the religious , educational , regional , labour and agrarian spheres . 

  To concentrate on new legislation or the statutory repealing of the old is , however , to miss the point . 

  What really counted was the attitude of government to the implementation and observance of legislation , especially at local level , and here it is clear that from the moment the Radical leader , Lerroux , first assumed the premiership in September 1933 a dramatic reaction set in . 

  During 1934 the advantage in rural Spain was allowed to swing violently back to landowners , landlords and employers , many of whom seized every opportunity to reverse by means of sackings , wage-cuts and evictions labour's modest gains of the previous two-and-a-half years . 

  Lerroux , believing that the pendulum had swung too far left in 1931-3 , was now hoping to draw irreversibly into the Republican fold the conservative forces largely represented by the CEDA . 

  Although if some sort of republic was to survive such a tactic made theoretical sense , its practicability was seriously undermined by the nature of the CEDA's ideology and wealthy support . 

  Gil Robles had a " tactic " of his own , involving a gradual advance towards " full power " and a transformation of the Republic into what , it seemed likely , would be a " corporate state " inspired by Catholic principles but also bearing some resemblance to Italian fascism . 

  Quite apart from the fears this aroused on the left , the price of CEDA support was a return , especially in rural Spain , to the social situation of the monarchy -- a course that could only have explosive consequences . 

  THE RESPONSE OF THE LEFT 

  The rank and file of both the Socialist movement and the CNT had been frustrated enough at the limitations of social reform under the Republic ; when the Radicals and the right set about negating what little seemed to have been gained , militancy rose to new levels . 

  The almost unanimous electoral abstention of CNT members in November 1933 , in protest at the shortcomings of Republican reformism and the repressiveness of the Azaa governments towards the CNT itself , contributed significantly to the left's defeat . 

  In December there followed the most extensive anarchist rising of the entire Republican period . 

  Most serious in parts of Catalonia , in Aragon and in neighbouring Rioja , the movement was eventually suppressed with military force ; the strength and resilience of Aragonese anarchism were nevertheless still evident in the spring of 1934 , when the regional capital , Zaragoza , was paralysed for weeks by a general strike . 

  Spanish socialism , meanwhile , was in the early stages of what was to be termed " bolshevization " : a shift towards revolutionary positions in which moderates like Prieto found themselves struggling to retain influence and party office . 

  The Socialists' leftward lurch was stimulated not only by the accumulated frustrations of office but also by a fear of " fascism " , chiefly in the shape of the CEDA . 

  Ideologically speaking the CEDA may not have been strictly fascist ; however , in view of its authoritarian tendencies , the belligerent rhetoric of Gil Robles and other leading cedistas , the fascistic posturings of its youth movement , and the harshness of the social reaction it embodied , it is not difficult to understand the fears it aroused on the left . 

  The crushing of the Austrian Socialists in February 1934 by a Catholic government ideologically close to the CEDA merely served to convince many Socialists , already acutely aware of the fate suffered by their Italian and German comrades , of the need to prepare for the worst . 

  Largo Caballero , the anarchists' habitual enemy , now began to call for a " Workers " Alliance' embracing the Socialists , the CNT , the small Spanish Communist Party and the rest of the working-class left . 

  As 1934 wore on , the atmosphere grew increasingly tense . 

  The appointment of a hardline Radical , Salazar Alonso , to the Interior ministry in May signalled an even tougher governmental attitude on social issues and a desire to provoke desperate strikes in order to weaken labour and the left still further . 

  In June the FNTT , under the pressure of rising rural unemployment and employer intransigence , called an agricultural labourers' strike , the swift collapse of which dealt a serious blow to the entire UGT . 

  If this could happen with the CEDA merely exerting pressure upon the government from outside , the Socialist and Republican left wondered , what would the CEDA do if actually admitted to the cabinet ? 

  For the entire working-class left the answer seemed to be that the tragedy of Austria would be replayed in Spain ; for the Republican left it was that the Republic would be constitutionally " revised " out of existence . 

  When , during the summer , disputes arose over the scope of Catalan autonomy and Basque local government , Catalanists and Basque Nationalists concluded that the right was also bent upon reasserting central power . 

  In late September 1934 , Gil Robles brought down the government and the CEDA was admitted to a reformed cabinet . 

  The Socialist response was a general strike . 

  In most of Spain , especially in the demoralized countryside , the strike quickly collapsed thanks to ill-preparedness , lack of resolution and determined government action . 

  In the mining region of Asturias , however , it developed into a full-scale revolt involving not only UGT workers but also , in the first practical manifestation of the " Workers " Alliance' , the CNT and the Communists . 

  A quite different rising occurred in Barcelona , where the Esquerra leader , Companys , was manoeuvred by extreme Catalan Nationalists into proclaiming Catalonia's independence . 

  The Barcelona rising , which failed to enlist the vital support of the CNT , was quickly suppressed , but that in Asturias lasted a fortnight until finally crushed , with considerable blood-shed , by Spanish and Moorish troops commanded by General Francisco Franco . 

  FROM ASTURIAS TO THE POPULAR FRONT 

  After Asturias , the prospects for a democratic Republic were even bleaker than before . 

  The most immediate consequence was the swingeing repression carried out during the autumn and winter of 1934-5 . 

  Mass arrests created over 30,000 political prisoners ; much of the left-wing press , numerous left-controlled councils and the Catalan Autonomy Statute were suspended . 

  The CNT -- not for the first time under the Republic -- was driven virtually underground and most of the UGT executive imprisoned . 

  Even so the repression , thanks mainly to the moderating role of Lerroux and the Radicals , stopped short of the extremes urged by the monarchist right and much of the CEDA : judicial executions were few , while at least the left remained legal and the Catalan Statute in being . 

  From the spring of 1935 the Republican left and the Socialists were therefore able to revive and eventually form a new alliance , the Popular Front , to resist " fascism " in the future . 

  The left's recovery confirmed the opinion of many on the right in the months following Asturias that a precious opportunity to smash the left and destroy the Republic was being lost . 

  Wiser heads , impressed by the scale and intensity of working-class militancy in a single region and recognizing that an ill-timed coup might merely provoke rather than prevent a nationwide revolution of the left , placed their faith in subtler tactics . 

  It was probably Gil Robles' confidence that the right could achieve " full power " electorally that restrained him , as Minister of War between May and December 1935 , from using his position , and his carefully cultivated good relations with the army general staff , to engineer a military takeover . 

  Another deterrent , undoubtedly , was his appreciation that , in the event of a successful coup , power was unlikely to revert to a civilian such as himself . 

  The CEDA-Radical partnership proved to have little positive to offer Spain in the wake of Asturias . 

  Although Gil Robles and a sincere " Social-Catholic " minority within the CEDA were anxious to demonstrate their reforming credentials , and thereby to retain the loyalty of their own peasant supporters , with a programme aimed at converting rural tenants into property-owners , they got nowhere in the face of opposition from monarchists and the reactionary majority of their own party . 

  As for the Radicals , during 1935 the party began to break up under the strains of the relationship with the CEDA and a succession of financial scandals . 

  When the third coalition government to include the CEDA fell in December 1935 , Alcala Zamora seized the opportunity to exclude the party from an interim cabinet pending a new election . 

  This was held on 16 February 1936 and for the first time in the history of the Second Republic involved an evenly matched contest between large , cohesive left- and right-wing alliances ; the Radical Party virtually disappeared as a significant force , leaving the political centre effectively unrepresented . 

  The confrontation was symbolic of the accelerating polarization which had occurred over the previous five years , with the Popular Front calling for a determined re-application of the policies of 1931-3 and the right for radical constitutional revision . 

  The apocalyptic character of the two sides' respective visions of what the other's victory would mean offered graphic proof of their inability to coexist . 

  For the Popular Front the right's victory would lead straight to " fascism " ; for the right , that of the Popular Front to " Bolshevik " revolution . 

  THE OMINOUS SPRING OF 1936 

  The election of 16 February 1936 gave the Popular Front a narrow majority of votes but , thanks to the idiosyncrasies of the Republic's electoral system , a commanding parliamentary majority . 

  Azaa promptly returned to power at the head of a purely Republican government , the Socialists preferring to shun cabinet responsibility . 

  Having released thousands of political prisoners , the new government proceeded to re-introduce the educational , religious and agrarian policies of 1931-3 ; in addition autonomy was restored to Catalonia and promised to the Basque Nationalists , whose loyalty to the Republic was thereby secured . 

  It was nevertheless outside parliament and the cabinet room that Spain's future was being decided . 

  Throughout much of the south , where since late-1935 chronic rural unemployment had been aggravated by climatic disasters , the rural poor celebrated the election victory with a new aggressiveness . 

  Anticipating land reform , poor peasants and agricultural labourers occupied large estates in a number of southern provinces ; several villagers , as in Yeste ( Albacete ) , perished in the attempt at the hands of the Civil Guard . 

  Although land-occupations and a rash of urban strikes were spontaneous and largely uncoordinated , rightists saw them as evidence of the revolution they had predicted would follow a Popular Front victory . 

  With the CEDA's accidentalist tactic shattered by election defeat , the initiative on the right was passing to advocates of anti-Republican violence and conspiracy . 

  The principal beneficiary of the CEDA's discomfiture was the fascist Falange . 

  A barely significant political force throughout the two-and-a-half years since its foundation , the Falange now found its numbers swelling dramatically with disillusioned members of the CEDA Youth . 

  In the streets of Madrid and other cities its blue-shirted militants stepped up anti-leftist terror in an attempt to de-stabilize the Republic . 

  Meanwhile , a serious conspiracy against the Republic was being hatched . 

  The key plotters were senior army officers such as Generals Mola , Goded and Fanjul , together with middle-ranking officers hostile to another phase of Republican reformism and ideologically subverted since 1931 by right-wing propaganda . 

  Although the titular head of the conspiracy was Sanjurjo , exiled to Portugal following his failed rising in 1932 , it was Mola who in April assumed the role of " Director " . 

  Also drawn into the plot were the Carlists and other extreme right-wing political groups . 

  The Carlists had been building up the paramilitary Requet since the early days of the Republic and seriously preparing for a rising since 1934 . 

  When , in March 1936 , Mola was appointed commander of the garrison at Pamplona , capital of the Carlist stronghold of Navarre , he established close contacts with the local Carlist leadership in the hope of enlisting the Requet in the projected rising . 

  The Alfonsists , now led by the tough and ambitious Jos Calvo Sotelo , helped things along with money and important contacts , as did leading cedistas including Gil Robles himself . 

  Although the Falange was less central to the conspiracy , there was never any doubt that it would join in any right-wing rising that might occur . 

  In the face of widespread unrest , Falangist violence , rumours of conspiracies and the increasingly pugnacious demeanour of right-wing press and politicians , the Republic required from its leaders strength , unity and determination . 

  These qualities largely failed to materialize . 

  Although Jos Antonio Primo de Rivera and several other Falangist leaders were imprisoned and military commands half-heartedly reshuffled , neither the Falange's growth nor the military threat were significantly curbed . 

  The only hope for firm government , willing to defend the Republic by confronting rightist subversion , vigorously prosecuting reform , yet allaying fears of social revolution , lay with Azaa , elevated to the Presidency of the Republic in May , and Prieto , the shrewd and combative leader of the Socialist Party's moderate wing . 

  A Prieto premiership was nevertheless ruled out by a Socialist leadership within which Largo Caballero and the " bolshevizers " were dominant . 

  Unimpressed by Prieto's insistence that Socialist moderation was the best defence against an ever more apparent flight by conservative Spaniards towards fascism , Largo Caballero , flaunting the label of " the Spanish Lenin' bestowed upon him by Pravda , preferred to beguile the Socialist rank and file with the prospect of an imminent collapse of capitalism and transition to socialism . 

  As the Socialist left's relationship with the moderates in its own party deteriorated , so links with a suddenly expanding Communist Party grew closer . 

  In March the youth movements of the two organizations fused , the Communist Youth in effect absorbing the Young Socialists in what was advertised as an act of left-wing fraternity . 

  Whilst lacking serious revolutionary intentions or any clear revolutionary strategy , Largo Caballero and the Socialist left thus played their part in heating up the political atmosphere and making strong Republican government impossible . 

  Although the new Prime Minister , the sickly Galician Republican Casares Quiroga , preferred to discount the existence of a serious conspiracy , and although the conspirators " preparations had not been easy , by the early summer all but the final pieces were in place for a military rising with strong right-wing civilian support . 

  A blow against the Republic from the right was now merely a matter of time . 

  When , on 13 July , Calvo Sotelo was assassinated by Republican police in retaliation for the killing of one of their number by a Falangist , the rebels had the perfect pretext for making their move . 

  The Civil War 1936-9 

  From rebellion to Civil War : July-November 1936 

  Whatever may have been in the minds of right-wing conspirators and left-wing militants during the " ominous spring " of 1936 , it was certainly not a prolonged civil war . 

  The carefully worked-out plan of the military plotters was for as swift a takeover as possible ; if , however , the ideal was a classic pronunciamiento along the lines of 1923 , General Mola was not alone in appreciating that times had changed and that opposition would have to be overcome . 

  The rebel officers' paramilitary allies , the Carlists and Falangists , were certainly eager to spill the blood of their left-wing enemies , yet they too thought in terms of days rather than years of actual military conflict . 

  What turned the rising of 17-18 July 1936 into a civil war was , first of all , the rebels' failure , due to hesitation and division within the officer corps and the militarized police forces , to seize control quickly enough throughout the country ; second , the decision of the Republican government to arm the UGT and CNT militias , which contributed to the defeat of the rising in important centres ; and finally the intervention of foreign powers , enabling the two sides to continue the struggle indefinitely . 

  THE RISING AND THE RESPONSE 

  As planned , the military rising commenced in Spanish Morocco and the Canary Islands on 17 July 1936 . 

  In Morocco command was assumed by General Franco , a late but important recruit to the conspiracy , flown there from the Canaries in a plane provided by British sympathizers . 

  During 18-19 July the rebellion was taken up by garrisons on the Spanish mainland , spreading roughly northwards from Andalusia . 

  It was quickly successful in those provincial capitals where garrison commanders were squarely behind the rebellion and where civilian sympathy was evident : for example in Pamplona , where thousands of Navarrese Carlists rushed to volunteer ; in Burgos , the austere heart of Old Castile ; and throughout much of conservative northern Spain . 

  The rebels also succeeded , sometimes through audacity or sheer bluff , in a number of cities , such as the CNT stronghold of Zaragoza , Seville and Crdoba in Andalusia , and the Asturian capital of Oviedo , where the popular climate was distinctly less congenial . 

  In other important cities , however , including Mlaga in the south , Santander on the north coast , and the Basque city of Bilbao , the rising either failed to get started or was swiftly quelled by loyal troops and members of the two main armed police forces , the Civil Guard and Assault Guard . 

  In several towns and cities , indeed , the attitude of the police proved decisive in tilting the issue one way or another . 

  With the rising far from achieving complete success , the outcome in Madrid and Barcelona was crucial . 

  Amid an increasingly confused situation the central government in Madrid and the Generalitat in Barcelona found themselves facing demands that they distribute to UGT and CNT members arms with which to resist " fascism " . 

  Madrid saw three governments in a day . 

  First Casares Quiroga , who had fatally underestimated the seriousness of what he called an " absurd plot " and refused to arm the workers , panicked and made way for the more conservative Martnez Barrio . 

  Having tried unsuccessfully to negotiate by telephone a compromise truce with Mola and other rebel commanders , he in turn resigned and was replaced by Azaa's friend Jos Giral . 

  The difficult decision to arm the union militias was now taken , enabling workers to participate in crushing the rising in Madrid when , finally , it occurred . 

  In Barcelona , when the president of the Generalitat , Companys , shrank from arming the CNT , the latter's members seized weapons from the arsenals ; together with loyal police , they overcame the rebels and ensured the failure of the rising throughout Catalonia . 

  Armed workers also helped tip the balance in the Basque city of San Sebastin and in Valencia , principal city of eastern Spain . 

  By 22 July , the date by which the military conspirators had hoped to be in control of the entire country , it was clear that the territory of Spain was split between the two camps ( see map on p. xv ) . 

  The rebels controlled a broad band of northern and north-western Spain , extending eastwards into Aragon but excluding most of the north coast ; in addition they had triumphed in the Canaries , in Mallorca and Ibiza , in Spanish Morocco , and in pockets of Andalusia including four of its principal cities and the southernmost tip of the Spanish mainland between Cdiz and Algeciras . 

  For the moment the Republic held most of the north coast , Catalonia , Minorca , and the greater part of southern Spain . 

  This immediate stalemate could be ended in one of two ways : through a negotiated peace or a sudden change in the military circumstances of one or both sides . 

  The former , following Mola's early rejection , was rendered even less likely by two unfolding developments : the Republican government's loss of authority throughout much of the area nominally under its control ; and the bloodletting in both zones as zealots took revenge upon their political enemies . 

  Only a military resolution of the situation was now possible , and it was difficult to see how this could come about quickly . 

  Already , within a week of being launched , what the conspirators had intended as a smooth , swift , surgical coup d " tat was turning into a full-scale civil war . 

  MILITARY AND ECONOMIC RESOURCES 

  In determining the outcome of coups d'tat the decisive factors may well be preparation , timing , audacity and luck . 

  The winning of civil wars , however , depends upon the distribution , mobilization and deployment of military , economic and , in the widest sense , human resources . 

  An examination of the resources of the two sides at the start of the Spanish Civil War reveals how delicately these were balanced and underlines the influence that the manner of their use was likely to have upon the course of the conflict . 

  The role of loyal officers and police in the events of 17-20 July demonstrates that while the rising may have been predominantly military in character it was far from being a rising of all the military . 

  In the event the army of officer corps on the Spanish mainland divided roughly equally between rebels and loyalists : 75 per cent of divisional generals , 70 per cent of brigadier-generals and a majority of colonels stayed loyal , but lower-echelon and particularly younger officers sided overwhelmingly and enthusiastically with the rebellion . 

  As of late July 1936 the rebellion could claim 62,000 officers and men , the government some 55,000 . 

  The balance within the militarized police forces tilted the other way : of some 68,000 Civil Guards and Assault Guards , 60 per cent remained loyal : surprisingly in view of the former's reputation as the hammer of the rural poor , but crucially for the early failure of the rising in many places . 

  In the air force the government held a three-to-two advantage , while sailors " mutinies brought most of the navy over to the Republican side . 

  These figures may be somewhat misleading , however ; many of those army and police officers who remained " loyal " undoubtedly did so more through geographical accident than conviction , and the Republic's leaders were inhibited from ever making full use of them . 

  Given the above balance of forces , what was to prove the decisive military element was to be found outside metropolitan Spain . 

  The 24,000-strong Army of Africa , stationed in Morocco and commanded by General Franco , was incomparably the best fighting force in the Spanish army and one hundred per cent behind the rising . 

  If -- and given the Republic's apparent naval and air strength it was a big " if " -- the Army of Africa could be transported from Morocco to the mainland , the military advantage would shift dramatically towards the rebels . 

  In August 1936 Prieto claimed that the rebels were certain to fail owing to the Republic's superior economic resources . 

  He certainly had a point . 

  The government possessed the considerable gold and silver reserves of the Bank of Spain , while its territory contained Spain's chief industrial regions , notably the Basque coastal region with its iron , steel and armaments industry , and produced important export crops such as citrus fruits and olive oil . 

  This apparent advantage over a predominantly rural rebel zone would only be maintained , however , if the Republic could hold on to its territory , overcome the isolation of the north coast from the rest of the zone , put its precious metal reserves to good use , pay for essential raw materials and feed its large urban population . 

  EARLY FOREIGN INVOLVEMENT 

  Although both sides in the Civil War were to make propaganda capital out of the international relationships of the other , neither was justified in suggesting that its enemy's pre-war foreign contacts had significant bearing upon the events of the Second Republic or the actual coming of the war . 

  On the left , the attitude of Moscow and the Third International , in so far as they had any influence at all in Spain before the war , was to encourage Popular Front democracy and discourage revolution . 

  On the right , while Italian and German agents were active in Spain and sympathetic to the Spanish right , they can not be said to have exerted pressure upon it or materially to have assisted it in subverting the Republic . 

  Although a monarchist deputation did visit Mussolini in March 1934 to solicit help in a possible future rising , little practical as distinct from rhetorical assistance was forthcoming . 

  Nevertheless by 19 July both sides were looking for foreign help . 

  The Republican government was , of course , the legal government of Spain and as such entitled to expect to be able to purchase arms on the international market . 

  The most obvious suppliers were the Republic's fellow democracies , Britain and France , especially the latter which in May had also elected a Popular Front government . 

  On 19 July Giral accordingly requested arms and aircraft from the French Socialist premier , Lon Blum . 

  As a result of Blum's initially sympathetic response , in early August modest quantities of French aircraft arrived in Spain . 

  Well before the end of July , however , Blum was facing a cabinet divided on the issue , vociferous opposition from the French right , and clear signals from the Baldwin government in Britain that it would not welcome French support for the Republic . 

  Blum therefore felt obliged to go back on his original commitment to aid Spanish democracy , and instead proposed that the main European powers agree on a policy of " non-intervention " in Spain . 

  By the end of August , non-intervention was officially a reality . 

  Blum's hope that non-intervention , if dutifully observed , would be in the Republic's interests made theoretical sense in the light of the already clear success of the rebels in attracting foreign help . 

  During the first week of hostilities Franco made pleas for help to both Mussolini and Hitler . 

  Mussolini was the more hesitant ; having failed to respond to two telegrams from Franco requesting aid in the form of military or civilian aircraft , the Italian dictator eventually succumbed to the more flattering blandishments of the exiled Alfonso XIII and a high-level monarchist delegation . 

  As a result , twelve Savoia-81 bombers , at a price of 1,000,000 cash-in-advance , left Italy for Spanish Morocco on 29 July ; only nine arrived , the others having crashed en route . 

  Hitler , approached by Franco on 22 July through two Nazi businessmen operating in Morocco , was from the outset more positive ; identifying the rebels' chief short-term problem -- their lack of the means to ferry the Army of Africa across to the Spanish mainland -- he authorized the sending to Morocco of thirty Junker JU-52 transport planes . 

  Between them the Italian and German aircraft made possible an air-ferry which during late July and early August bore the greater part of the Army of Africa across the Straits of Gibraltar to Seville . 

  With the assertion of rebel air-supremacy in the area at the start of August , the process was completed by sea . 

  The rising thereby received a new impetus -- and , once begun , aid from Italy and Germany continued to arrive . 

  Meanwhile the Republic , effectively abandoned by its fellow democracies , had turned for help to the Soviet Union . 

  The moment and circumstances were propitious . 

  Since Hitler's accession to the German chancellorship in January 1933 , Stalin had concluded that international fascism , which hitherto he had interpreted as the herald of capitalist collapse , posed a threat after all , not only to the left within European countries but also to the survival of the Soviet Union itself . 

  His answer was the adoption during 1934-5 of a " Popular Front " policy for resisting fascism ; this involved Communist support for " bourgeois democratic " governments threatened by fascism , together with Soviet efforts at courting the diplomatic friendship of the western European democracies . 

  In responding to a plea for help from Spain's Popular Front government , Stalin was thus pursuing what he perceived to be the foreign policy interests of the Soviet Union . 

  If , of course , the position of the hitherto weak Spanish Communist Party could be enhanced in the process , so much the better . 

  What Soviet aid , the first consignments of which began to reach Spain in October 1936 , was emphatically not intended to do was advance the cause of social revolution in Republican Spain . 

  THE ADVANCE ON MADRID 

  Between late July and early October 1936 the rebels drove home the advantage given them by Franco's agreements with Mussolini and Hitler . 

  The military map of Spain at the start of the Civil War was a complex one , with both zones split into two : that of the rebels by a Republican-held strip in Extremadura , and that of the Republic owing to the isolation of the north coast . 

  Several fronts therefore formed . 

  In the north , while in Aragon the CNT militia pushed forward from Barcelona in an attempt to recapture the former anarchist stronghold of Zaragoza , elsewhere the rebels seized the initiative . 

  From Pamplona the army and the Carlist Requet advanced northwards and by September , with the help of Italian bombers , had seized Irn and San Sebastin , thereby cutting off the rest of the Basque country and the north coast from the French border . 

  Other detachments headed south from northern , rebel-held cities in an advance on Madrid , only to find themselves humiliatingly held by urban militia groups in the Guadarrama mountains north of the city . 

  This last disappointment bestowed proportionately greater importance upon developments in the southern sector . 

  While military , Falangist and Carlist units , fanning out from rebel-held Seville , Cdiz , Crdoba and Granada , set about conquering the rest of Andalusia , Franco's Army of Africa and its accompanying Moorish troops pushed rapidly northwards from their southern beach-head into Extremadura and towards Madrid . 

  Resistance from left-wing militia forces and loyalist Civil and Assault Guards was intermittently intense but incapable of seriously holding up the advance . 

  With the capture of Mrida on 10 August the two halves of Nationalist territory were united . 

  The left-wing stronghold of Badajoz fell on 14 August and Talavera , the last significant town before Madrid , on 2 September . 

  The Nationalists' military advances were everywhere marked by the slaughter of leftist militiamen and of known left-wing and Republican activists . 

  At least 2,000 died in Badajoz alone , most of them machine-gunned in the bullring ; thousands more perished at the hands of the Legionaries , the Moors or the right-wing militias in other towns and villages of Andalusia and Extremadura . 

  Nor was such repression restricted to the formerly conflict-ridden south , for even in less socially divided regions like Navarre and Mallorca , where actual military campaigning was non-existent , political executions numbered thousands . 

  The terror was cold-blooded and deliberate , designed to eradicate all opposition , secure the Nationalist rearguard and instil fear into those who still awaited the rebel advance . 

  There was to be no let-up : by the end of the Civil War at least 200,000 enemies of the Nationalist " crusade " would have been executed in this way . 

  The two Spains 

  As it became evident that a full-scale civil war was in progress in Spain , foreign observers hastened to impose an imaginary order upon a confused reality by attaching neat labels to the two sides . 

  According to taste and political outlook the one was " Republican " , " Loyalist " or " Red " , the other " Insurgent " , " Nationalist " or " Fascist " . 

  The truth was of course less simple . 

  The Republican cause embraced -- far from comfortably -- conservative , Catholic Basque Nationalists ; Catalanists of all complexions ; moderate and left-wing Republicans ; right- and left-wing Socialists ; Stalinist and anti-Stalinist Communists ; and anarchists . 

  With each group possessing its own goals , vision of the war's purpose and views as to how it should be fought , " Republican " unity during the early months of the war was agonizingly difficult to achieve . 

  The forces of Nationalist Spain represented a coalition too : of military insurgents , Falangists , Carlists , Alfonsist monarchists , CEDA supporters , and assorted independent conservatives , Catholics and opportunists . 

  Consciousness of this fact , plus a desire to court moderate Republican opinion , ensured that early rebel pronouncements were limited to vague calls for the prevention of left-wing revolution , the maintenance of national unity and the restoration of authority ; beyond that it remained unclear whether the rising , if successful , would produce a conservative , more authoritarian republic , a monarchist restoration , a military dictatorship or perhaps even an out-and-out fascist state . 

  During the first year of the Civil War the issues of unity and authority were largely resolved in both zones . 

  For the Republic the experience was a painful and , some would always argue , self-defeating one ; for the Nationalists , united by a common deference towards authority , matters proceeded more smoothly -- and in such a way as to determine Spain's future for almost forty years to come . 

  REVOLUTION AND AUTHORITY IN REPUBLICAN SPAIN 

  In the aftermath of the July rising the Republic faced the threat not only of military overthrow but also of its own disintegration . 

  Across much of Republican Spain , established authority collapsed as often suspect local councils and police were swept aside by armed villagers and trade unionists . 

  Grassroots power now passed to " anti-fascist " committees , variously constituted according to the local balance of left-wing allegiance . 

  At regional level , too , new sources of authority emerged ; in the coastal Basque provinces , cut off from the heartland of Republican Spain , the separate Basque Republic of Euskadi came into existence ; in Catalonia , where Companys reached an accommodation with the CNT , an anti-fascist Militia Committee ran affairs independently of Madrid ; and in October Aragon became an autonomous CNT fief administered by its own regional " Council " . 

  For the next year the Republican government was obliged to struggle to reassert its authority . 

  In some instances , new organs of authority represented merely an extemporized response to the sudden appearance of a power vacuum . 

  Elsewhere they were associated with a spontaneous and far-reaching social revolution in which the moving spirits were the CNT , the left wing of the UGT and , in Catalonia , the POUM -- a small but vigorous anti-Stalinist communist party . 

  Throughout wide areas , land , industry , commerce and services underwent collectivization . 

  The process was very uneven . 

  Madrid and Valencia continued to present a relatively conventional face to the world , while in PNV-dominated Euskadi no collectivization whatsoever occurred . 

  In Catalonia , Aragon and Republican-held Andalusia , however , a new revolutionary order appeared in the process of creation , enthusiastically supported by the urban and rural working class if not always by the lower-middle class and landholding peasantry . 

  The military arm of the revolution was the workers' militias , believed by their advocates to be both necessary to defend the revolution and capable of defeating fascism through their members' commitment to the new society . 

  In many areas the revolution was accompanied by the summary execution of the local ruling class -- landowners , caciques , police and priests . 

  The toll was considerable -- as many as 6,000 priests , for example , may have died within Republican Spain -- and a stain upon the Republic's reputation . 

  Nevertheless it must be recognized that most of the killing of rightists in the Republican zone was spontaneous and that the government sought , successfully in the long run , to bring it to an end . 

  The contrast with the deliberate and sustained pursuit of leftists in the Nationalist zone needs no further elaboration . 

  The dispersal of power and the divisive potential of the revolution created grave problems for a Republican government threatened by the Nationalists' advance on Madrid . 

  The Giral government , consisting entirely as it did of bourgeois Republicans , was increasingly irrelevant to the new situation . 

  On 4 September 1936 it was therefore replaced by a genuine " Popular Front " government , headed by Largo Caballero and containing Socialists and Communists . 

  For all his shortcomings Largo Caballero was the only political figure with sufficient standing on the left to have any chance of harnessing the revolution to the cause of victory ; his advocacy of " Workers " Alliance' between 1934 and 1936 had helped to dissipate some of the mutual antagonism which had previously soured his relations with the CNT , while his role as the " Spanish Lenin' during 1936 had made possible a close relationship with the Spanish Communist Party . 

  These links were crucial , given the numerical strength and revolutionary role of the CNT and the leverage available to the Communists once Soviet aid began to arrive in October . 

  On 4 November , in one of the twentieth century's most ideologically self-sacrificial gestures , members of the CNT swallowed their hostility towards the exercise of authority and joined the Republican government . 

  Two days later , with the Nationalists on the western outskirts of Madrid , the government left the beleaguered and , it was unanimously believed , doomed Spanish capital for the safer haven of Valencia . 

  THE COMMUNISTS AND THE REPUBLIC 

  The breadth of Largo Caballero's government in no sense reflected unanimity among its members concerning the nature and imperatives of the war . 

  Two schools of thought emerged during the summer of 1936 . 

  For the anarchists , the POUM and sections of the Socialist left the social revolution within the Republican zone had become the chief reason for fighting fascism and , indeed , the only basis upon which workers and poor peasants could be expected to fight it . 

  Bourgeois Republicans and right-wing Socialists like Prieto , Minister of Navy and Air in the Largo Caballero cabinet , and Dr Juan Negrn , Minister of Finance , argued that collectivization caused economic disruption and would alienate the lower-middle-class and better-off peasantry from the Republic . 

  As for the militias , however zealous and heroic , they had no chance of triumphing over the Nationalist armies . 

  Governmental authority must be restored , the economy and war-effort be efficiently managed , and the chaotic militias be replaced by a disciplined conventional army . 

  These anti-revolutionary views coincided with those of the Spanish Communist Party , dutifully following Stalin's " Popular Front " line of solidarity with bourgeois democrats in the anti-fascist struggle . 

  Revolution in Spain , the Communists insisted , must be postponed until victory had been won and the appropriate " objective conditions " had developed . 

  As Soviet aid , Communist-sponsored volunteers , and Comintern agents entered Spain during the winter of 1936-7 , Communist influence increased both inside and outside the government . 

  So did membership of the Spanish Communist Party , its social conservatism and emphasis upon discipline appealing to many professional people , army officers and members of the urban and rural lower-middle classes . 

  By the spring of 1937 the Largo Caballero government had gone some way towards taming the process of social revolution and absorbing the militias into a regular army built around the Communists' own Fifth Regiment . 

  The social revolution had not , however , been completely reversed . 

  Largo Caballero was unwilling to move as far or as fast in an anti-revolutionary direction as his Communist , Republican and moderate Socialist colleagues wished . 

  Moreover , he was becoming increasingly annoyed at the Communists' blatant attempts to maximize their influence wherever it mattered -- in , for example , the army and the administration -- and to dictate strategy . 

  For their part , the Communists , and even more their Soviet and Comintern masters , were becoming impatient with the Premier's uncooperativeness and low credibility as a war leader . 

  With antagonism growing between the Communists and their CNT and POUM rivals , the politics of Republican Spain were about to enter a new phase . 

  Crisis erupted in early May 1937 in Barcelona , in the shape of the " civil war within the Civil War " so graphically described by George Orwell . 

  Four days of street-fighting between the CNT and POUM on one side , and the Catalonian Communists of the PSUC ( Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia ) on the other , ended with the Communists victorious and Barcelona occupied by troops of the Valencia government . 

  When Largo Caballero resisted Communist pressure to dissolve the POUM and arrest its leaders , the Communists decided that the time had come to get rid of him . 

  On 16 May 1937 they contrived a cabinet crisis ; Largo Caballero resigned as premier and was replaced by Negrn , at the head of a cabinet free of left-wing Socialists and which the anarchists chose not to join . 

  The clear policy of the Negrn government was the pragmatic pursuit of victory , involving the reversal of the revolution , assertion of governmental authority and the Republic's democratic credentials , and maintenance of good relations with the Soviet Union . 

  During the late spring and summer of 1937 the revolution was well and truly rolled back in two of its former strongholds : Catalonia , which ceased to be autonomous within Republican Spain , and Aragon , where the CNT-dominated Council of Aragon was physically destroyed by Communist forces . 

  The POUM became the object of a ruthless and bloody purge , and its leader , Andreu Nin , was captured , tortured and killed by the Soviet secret police . 

  Although the strong-minded Negrn was never the Communist catspaw his many critics accused him of being , there was little he could do in the circumstances to prevent the Communists from exercising an increasingly independent and even dominant role within Republican Spain . 

  Nationalist Spain : The rise and rise of Francisco Franco 

  At the start of the 1936 rising , Francisco Franco was certainly not marked out as its eventual generalsimo , much less as the future leader of Spain . 

  His military capacities , demonstrated in Morocco during the 1920s , were well known and respected , and his importance to the conspiracy as the designated commander of the Army of Africa was central . 

  Nevertheless other generals -- Sanjurjo , the nominal head of the rebellion ; Mola , its " Director " ; or the arch-conspirator Goded , who was named to lead the rising in Catalonia -- appeared more likely overall leaders . 

  Quite apart from Franco's youth -- he was only 44 in 1936 -- his cautiousness towards involvement in conspiratorial activity had attracted criticism from many fellow officers , some of whom scornfully dubbed him " Miss Canary Islands of 1936 " . 

  When the rebels formed a provisional National Defence Junta a week after the start of the rising , Franco was not a member , although he became one a few weeks later . 

  Franco's rise to military and political supremacy within Nationalist Spain was nevertheless meteoric . 

  Sympathizers saw in this the hand of providence , while enemies suspected " dirty tricks " . 

  Luck and favourable circumstances certainly played an important part . 

  Sanjurjo perished at the very outset when the plane taking him back to Spain from his Portuguese exile crashed on take-off . 

  Goded was imprisoned when the Barcelona rising collapsed , and later executed . 

  Mola found himself commanding difficult campaigns in northern Spain and was damaged by the Carlist connections about which he himself felt uneasy . 

  As for possible civilian contenders for political leadership , Calvo Sotelo was dead before the war began , Gil Robles remained discredited by political failure , and Jos Antonio was languishing in a Republican jail . 

  While the removal of individual rivals unquestionably smoothed Franco's path to power , what really launched him upon it was the role allotted to him in the rising and the manner in which this role was played out . 

  Command of the Army of Africa placed him in a decisive position once the initial impetus of the rising in peninsular Spain was lost . 

  His successful dealings with Mussolini and Hitler , necessary in order to get his forces across the Straits of Gibraltar to Spain , ensured him a relationship with the Nationalists' powerful allies such as no other rebel commander came close to possessing . 

  The dynamic campaign then waged under his command during the late summer of 1936 drew him into the spotlight as Nationalist Spain's most successful general . 

  When , in late September 1936 , the National Defence Junta , having recognized the need for an overall military commander , met in Salamanca to choose one , there was already only one serious candidate . 

  On 28 September Franco accepted the positions of Generalsimo of the armed forces and " Head of the Government of the Spanish State " with " all the powers of the New State " . 

  This assumption of political power as well as military command represented little short of a coup by Franco and a group of military and civilian supporters , mostly of monarchist sympathies ; within days Franco had quietly promoted himself to " Head of State " , a title he was to retain until his death 39 years later . 

  THE FORGING OF THE FRANCO DICTATORSHIP 

  The issue of Nationalist Spain's overall leadership may now have been settled but the precise shape of the emergent new state had not . 

  For Franco , the most problematical feature within the Nationalist zone was the continued existence of independent and competing political movements . 

  By far the most important , by virtue of their numbers , were Carlism and the Falange , both of which had expanded considerably -- in the Falange's case enormously -- since the start of the war . 

  The Carlists mainly recruited conservative Catholics suspicious of Falangist fascism ; the Falange , in common with other European fascist movements in their periods of explosive growth , absorbed tens of thousands of new members from all quarters of the political spectrum , from ex- cedistas to Republicans and even leftists anxious to combine self-preservation with a semblance of socio-political " radicalism " . 

  In the months following his elevation , three considerations pushed Franco towards drastically altering this situation . 

  In the first place , of course , the survival of autonomous and independently-minded political movements threatened his personal authority and could , in the long run , undermine his very position as Head of State . 

  Even if the Carlists were unlikely ever to possess more than nuisance value , the Falange , with its wider appeal and rapid growth-rate , was a different matter . 

  The second reason was more disinterested : a simple unwillingness to tolerate during wartime political divisions which might -- as in the Republican zone -- lessen military effectiveness . 

  Thirdly , Franco and advisers such as his brother-in-law , Ramn Serrano Suer , looking ahead to a post-war Spain and impressed by Italian and German precedents , were becoming increasingly attracted to the idea of a single-party and perhaps even totalitarian state . 

  During the winter of 1936-7 , Franco therefore brought the right-wing militias firmly under army control and set about establishing his authority over the political parties themselves . 

  In this he was undoubtedly assisted by problems within both mass parties . 

  In the Falange's case the principal issue was leadership ; when Jos Antonio Primo de Rivera , jailed in Alicante since before the start of the war , was executed in November 1936 , he left behind him a movement riddled with factionalism and cursed with second-rate would-be successors . 

  Carlism , too , was plagued by internal divisions and offered no resistance when , in December 1936 , Franco effectively exiled its political leader , Fal Conde , for too strenuously asserting his movement's independence . 

  The day of reckoning came on 19 April 1937 , when Franco issued the Decree of Unification , creating the single party of Nationalist Spain . 

  Within the grotesquely labelled Falange Espaola Tradicionalista y de las JONS , to be more manageably known as the FET or National Movement , under his own leadership Franco combined the Falange , the Carlists and the other , smaller political factions of Nationalist Spain . 

  In the event , this ambitious and seemingly provocative move took effect with remarkable ease . 

  Although many Carlists and Falangists naturally disliked the Unification , with their fighting men busy at the front there was little they could do to resist it , especially since they shared the general Nationalist respect for " authority " . 

  In any case , many others within both parties were amenable to the new order and rushed to grab jobs in the FET apparatus . 

  The " Unification " of April 1937 , and the appointment in January 1938 of the first Nationalist cabinet , proved to be the first steps in the creation of the authoritarian regime which , following the Nationalist victory in 1939 , was to govern Spain for another 36 years . 

  Within this regime , as it already existed by the end of the Civil War , the salient features were the prominent , but in no sense governing role of the FET ; the restoration of the Catholic Church to a position of monopoly in education and of powerful cultural influence ; the ruthless repression of all forms of opposition ; and above all , the unassailable position and total dominance of Franco himself . 

  The military struggle 

  THE REPUBLIC IN RETREAT : NOVEMBER 1936 -- JANUARY 1938 

  Contrary to universal expectation , Madrid did not fall in November 1936 . 

  It might perhaps have done so had Franco not delayed his assault in order to make a detour eastwards to Toledo . 

  The relief of the town's Alcazar , the military barracks where the Nationalist garrison was under siege from left-wing militias , while earning Franco the world's headlines and assisting his elevation to overall military and political command , also gave the Republicans precious time in which to organize the defence of the capital . 

  When the attack finally came Madrid withstood it , thanks in part to the courage of the left-wing militias and the ordinary people of the city , and in part to the stiffening effect of the first International Brigades -- foreign volunteers organized by the Comintern , who arrived at the crucial moment . 

  For several more months Madrid remained the focus of the fighting , as the Nationalists sought to surround the city and the Republicans to cut their enemy's lines of communication . 

  However , while battles such as those of the Jarama ( February 1937 ) , Guadalajara ( March 1937 ) and Brunete ( July 1937 ) were fought bitterly and with heavy casualties on both sides , as the Civil War entered its second year the fronts around Madrid had changed little since the previous November . 

  Elsewhere , the war was more mobile . 

  In February 1937 the southern coastal city of Mlaga was taken by Spanish and Italian forces , and its capture was followed by another massacre of leftists . 

  Between April and September 1937 the rest of the isolated north coast -- the Basque province of Vizcaya , Santander and Asturias -- fell to the Nationalists . 

  This brought to an end the short life of the Basque Republic of Euskadi , which under its president , Aguirre , had been waging what was very much its own war . 

  The fall of Vizcaya was preceded by one of the Spanish Civil War's most notorious actions : the bombing of the Basques' spiritual capital , Guernica , by the German Condor Legion , acting on the instructions of the Nationalist High Command . 

  The conquest of the north decisively tilted the scales in Franco's favour ; quite apart from the damage to Republican morale , it brought the Nationalists raw materials -- iron ore and coal -- and industrial capacity vital to the prosecution of modern warfare . 

  The course of the war between the Madrid stalemate and the beginning of 1938 clearly illustrates some of the two sides' military strengths and weaknesses . 

  In terms of military organization the Republic made considerable progress between the chaotic summer of 1936 and the second half of 1937 . 

  The disciplined regular army desired by Prieto and , of course , by the Communists was brought into being , and in the process competent commanders were discovered : men like Vicente Rojo , chief-of-staff from November 1936 ; Miaja , the " saviour of Madrid " ; the Communists Modesto , Lister and Valentn Gonzlez " El Campesino " ; and the anarchist Cipriano Mera . 

  Nevertheless the Republicans , plagued by continuing factional disputes over strategy , tactics and supply , proved unable to recapture lost territory . 

  Republican offensives at Brunete , west of Madrid ( July 1937 ) , Belchite in Aragon ( August-September 1937 ) and further south in Aragon at Teruel ( December 1937 -- February 1938 ) followed a similar pattern whereby small but costly gains of territory were quickly followed by its still more costly surrender to the counterattacking Nationalists . 

  The latter , meanwhile , settled in and around Madrid and concentrated upon advances elsewhere . 

  In Franco they possessed a leader who , notwithstanding German and Italian annoyance at his lack of dynamism and broad vision , was a first-rate field commander , devoted to the gradual but irreversible conquest of territory and with it the total subjection of the Spanish population . 

  During the course of 1937 the impact of foreign involvement -- and non-involvement -- upon the war became both more apparent and more complex . 

  Let us now , therefore , examine more closely this aspect of the Spanish Civil War . 

  FOREIGN INTERVENTION AND NON-INTERVENTION 

  The course of the Spanish Civil War was crucially affected by the Anglo-French adoption of , and adherence to , the policy of non-intervention , and the similar determination of US President Roosevelt to observe the strictest neutrality towards the Spanish struggle . 

  Not that there was ever any question of the western democracies intervening directly in the fighting ; what was at stake was the right of the Republic's legally elected government to purchase arms , ammunition and military supplies from its fellow democracies . 

  The French , British and United States governments were swayed in their unwillingness to recognize this right by rather different considerations . 

  In France , bitter political divisions , fear of foreign military entanglement and deference towards Britain forced Blum and the Popular Front government to reverse their initial policy of assisting the Republic and instead embrace non-intervention in the sincere hope of persuading other powers to keep out of Spain too . 

  The maintenance of this posture was ensured by the generally rightward shift of French cabinets between 1936 and 1939 , interrupted only by Blum's shortlived second government in early 1938 when aid was briefly resumed . 

  For their part , the Conservative-dominated National governments of Baldwin and Chamberlain in Britain , engaged in their policies of appeasement towards the fascist powers , were anxious to prevent the Spanish war from spreading , even at the cost of turning a blind eye to the involvement of Italy , Germany and the Soviet Union . 

  Moreover , within the Conservative Party , while some mavericks -- like , albeit belatedly , Churchill -- recognized that peace in Europe would be best served by the defeat of fascism in Spain , hostility towards the Spanish " Reds " and sympathy for Franco predominated : views shared in the business community , many of whose members continued to trade with Nationalist Spain throughout the war . 

  Labour and Liberal devotion to the Republican cause , while strong and passionate , was incapable of deflecting the course of British policy . 

  In the United States , fear of European embroilment and the pro-Nationalist zeal of many American Catholics effectively cancelled out the sympathy felt in liberal circles towards the Republic . 

  The institutional manifestation of non-intervention was the Non-Intervention Committee , set up in London in September 1936 to supervise the application of a principle observed by the democracies and by smaller European countries but openly flouted by Europe's three most powerful dictatorships . 

  The Soviet , Italian and German governments naturally justified their own infringement of non-intervention , to which they officially subscribed , by reference to the conduct of the other side . 

  Eden , the British foreign secretary , declared that non-intervention , " a leaky dam , but better than no dam at all " , prevented the outbreak of a general war . 

  No-one can say for certain whether he was right ; what can be stated with certainty is that with Italy and Germany helping the Nationalists almost from the beginning , non-intervention threw the Spanish Republic into the embrace of the only great power willing to help her -- the Soviet Union . 

  For two years following October 1936 , Soviet aid helped the Republic to fight on . 

  The aid itself took various forms : arms and ammunition , including perhaps 1,000 aircraft and 700 tanks ; Soviet and Comintern military -- and political -- advisers ; and the International Brigades : a total of nearly 60,000 foreign volunteers from all corners of the world , many of them refugees from fascist regimes or veterans of anti-fascist struggles , recruited and trained in the main by Communists . 

  The price paid by the Republic for this help was high . 

  As financial payment the Government had no alternative but to permit the dispatch of most of its gold and silver reserves to the Soviet Union . 

  Of far more significance to the war itself , however , was the political price represented by acceptance of Communist leverage within Republican Spain , and all that this proved to carry with it : interference in the composition of cabinets and the formulation of strategy ; the reversal of social revolution ; the persecution of political enemies ; and the steadily declining popular morale . 

  Soviet aid was never intended in any case to equip the Republic for victory , so much as to enable it to resist until the Spanish war became part of a more general conflict in which Britain and France would join the Soviet Union in fighting European fascism . 

  Once the Munich Agreement of October 1938 appeared to dash any such prospect , Stalin lost interest in Spain and help for the by then desperate Republic dried up . 

  The Soviet Union proved an unreliable friend . 

  The Nationalists fared better in their foreign dealings . 

  In terms of sheer quantity the material and human help provided by Mussolini and Hitler -- aircraft , tanks , armoured vehicles , small arms and ammunition , the 70-80,000 Italian " volunteers " and the German Condor Legion with its own 600 aircraft and 200 tanks -- may or may not have exceeded Soviet aid to the Republic . 

  More important was that German and Italian aid tended to arrive on request , and especially when most needed following Nationalist setbacks or preceding major pushes ; that it was channelled through Franco as Nationalist leader and not , as with Soviet aid to the Republic , through a political faction ; and that it came on easy credit terms with no political strings attached . 

  Although the Germans sought with some short-term success to turn Nationalist Spain into an economic dependency , neither they nor the Italians interfered significantly in the internal politics of Nationalist Spain . 

  THE DEATH AGONY OF THE REPUBLIC , JANUARY 1938 -- MARCH 1939 

  Non-intervention and the differential impact of foreign aid upon the two sides made a Republican victory all but impossible . 

  What is remarkable is that Republican resistance continued for so long after the loss of the north in mid-1937 -- a tribute to improved military organization and human courage . 

  Another factor was the legendary cautiousness of Franco , for whom slow progress and sure gains were always to be preferred to unnecessary risks . 

  However slowly , the Nationalists' gradual conquest of Spain continued . 

  In April 1938 their eastward advance reached the Mediterranean near Castelln , cutting Catalonia off from the rest of Republican Spain . 

  Had the advance been sustained , perhaps Catalonia would have fallen quickly ; instead Franco -- possibly , in the tense international atmosphere of mid-1938 , fearing actual French intervention were he to approach the French frontier -- turned south towards Valencia , only to find his offensive halted by Republican resistance . 

  In July there commenced the final Republican offensive of the war : the crossing of the river Ebro by 80,000 men in an attempt to reunite Catalonia with the " central zone " . 

  If the siege of Madrid was the first major epic of the Civil War , the Battle of the Ebro , similarly recorded in song , poetry and prose , was the last . 

  The battle lasted for over three months , repeating on a massive scale the established pattern of Republican offensives : an early breakthrough followed by retreat and heavy losses -- on this occasion 20,000 Republican fatalities and 55,000 wounded or captured . 

  After the Ebro , Catalonia could not be expected to hold on for long , and if Catalonia fell the rest of Republican Spain was likely to follow . 

  It was the unhappy fate of Juan Negrn to be Prime Minister of the Spanish Republic throughout its protracted agony . 

  If Largo Caballero's task had been difficult , Negrn's was impossible . 

  The Republic's continued dependence upon the Soviet Union guaranteed the Communists an influence within Republican Spain that the pragmatic premier could do little to resist . 

  The achievements of the Communists and their Comintern helpers in the purely military sphere , as exemplified by their contribution to the formation of the Republican Popular Army , were considerable ; if they created little likelihood of a Republican victory , certainly they postponed its defeat . 

  The Communists' negative achievement was the souring of the political atmosphere of Republican Spain . 

  Through their attack upon the social revolution , their politicization of the armed forces , their intolerance of opposition , and , most of all , their extensive use of brutal secret police methods via the SIM ( Military Investigation Service ) , they helped to convince many inhabitants of the Republican zone that fascist oppression could be little worse than that under which they were already living . 

  During 1938 war-weariness and pessimism began seriously to affect Republican Spain . 

  Malnutrition was now added to other reasons for demoralization as Republican territory and agricultural resources contracted . 

  To a population existing on " Dr Negrn's Resistance Pills " -- lentils -- leaflets dropped from Nationalist aircraft , informing them of the plentiful food in the Nationalist zone , were weapons as potent as bombs . 

  The information was also accurate ; Nationalist Spain , based on the agricultural regions of Spain and constantly expanding its territory faster than its population , was never short of food . 

  Among the leading figures of Republican Spain to conclude that sooner or later defeat was unavoidable were the President , Azaa , and Prieto ; in April 1938 the latter , following a Communist-orchestrated campaign , was ejected from his post as Defence Minister on grounds of " defeatism " . 

  Hopes of a compromise peace stood no chance in the face of Franco's determination to pursue the Republic's unconditional surrender . 

  Negrn was obliged to go on hoping that the outbreak of a general war would at last bring the democracies to the Republic's aid : a vain enough hope following the Anglo-Italian Naval Treaty of April 1938 but an even vainer one , as Stalin realized , after Munich . 

  The British and French recognition of the Franco regime in late February 1939 merely underlined the hopelessness of the Republic's diplomatic position . 

  After two-and-a-half years of stubborn resistance , the Republic collapsed rapidly during the first three months of 1939 . 

  Catalonia fell to the Nationalists during January and early February ; as Franco's armies advanced , taking 200,000 prisoners , half a million civilian and military refugees fled before them into France , among them Azaa and several members of the Republican government . 

  The " central zone " went the same way during March , its collapse preceded by a second " civil war within the Civil War " : a tragicomic affair in which " rebels " under Colonel Casado , anxious to negotiate a surrender , engineered a coup and then clashed with Communists eager to fight to the last . 

  In Madrid Casado triumphed and at the last moment Communist power was broken . 

  It was to no purpose , however , for Franco was no more inclined to negotiate now than at any time in the past year . 

  On 26 March the Nationalists entered Madrid , by the end of the month they had occupied the rest of the Republican zone and on 1 April Franco declared the Civil War at an end . 

  As right-wing supporters , many appearing in public for the first time in almost three years , welcomed their liberators with monarchist flags and fascist salutes , many other Spaniards faced a terrifying future : so terrifying , indeed , that to some suicide was preferable . 

  Several hundred thousand Spaniards and non-Spaniards had died on the battlefields of Spain between 1936 and 1939 ; at least 200,000 more were to be executed during the next few years , 2,000,000 would suffer imprisonment or forced labour , and millions more again faced a lifetime of discrimination for having fought on behalf of the Republic . 

  In a purely military sense the Spanish Civil War may have ended on 1 April 1939 , but for its victor , Francisco Franco , it would never truly end . 

  Interpretations , debates and conclusions 

  Having aroused such passions in its day , the Spanish Civil War has inevitably inspired disagreement among historians . 

  For many years the Franco regime saw to it that within Spain itself only pro-Nationalist accounts of the 1930s could be published , leaving the field of serious scholarship to foreigners , mostly from Britain and the United States . 

  Even they found access to many important historical sources difficult or impossible . 

  With the coming of a new democracy to Spain , however , the situation has been transformed ; enormous quantities of previously inaccessible research materials have become available to historians , and now , quite properly , it is the Spaniards themselves who are at the forefront of research , publication and the challenging of old orthodoxies . 

  Debate concerning the Spanish Civil War and its origins therefore remains vigorous . 

  The sections that follow represent an attempt to examine briefly some of the liveliest areas of debate . 

  Why did Spanish democracy fail ? 

  Since historians are creatures of flesh and blood , often with passionate convictions and opinions , and since the Spanish Civil War represents a recent historical event of unusual political , ideological and emotional content , it is hardly surprising that historical accounts of the 1931-6 period often appear to lack the objectivity attainable to students of episodes further in the past . 

  Few historians , admittedly , have sought to criticize the attempt to democratize a country so clearly and grossly racked by inequality , though most have quite reasonably stressed the unavoidable difficulties that such an attempt posed . 

  Disagreement has tended to centre upon the issue of responsibility for the evident political incompatibility of left and right and the consequent unworkability of Republican democracy . 

  Individual attributions of guilt point to left or right often according to the ideological standpoint of the scholar -- and , it must be stressed , the vision of history which this implies . 

  For those who view in a broadly positive light the reforming thrust of the 1931-3 governments , the fate of the Republic is to be explained by the underlying polarization within Spanish society , the inevitable conflicts which democracy therefore released , the obduracy of the conservative and the privileged , and the unwillingness of the main party of the right , the CEDA , to accept the Republic and the readjustment of wealth necessary to make democracy work . 

  Left-wing militancy a-d more especially the left-ward lurch of the Socialist Party are thus seen as responses to right-wing intransigence , and the right as bearing the main responsibility for political breakdown , ever-worsening social conflict , and ultimately , civil war . 

  Critics of this view variously suggest that Socialist propensity to " violence " anticipated that of the right ; that unnecessary enemies for the Republic were created by anticlericalism and , in general , too narrow a view on the part of the left as to what constituted acceptable " Republican " values , credentials and behaviour ; and that the CEDA , a potentially Christian Democratic party which might have evolved in a genuinely democratic direction , was actually forced rightwards by the conduct of the left . 

  What these debates clearly indicate is the enormous potential for social and political conflict in the Spain of the 1930s , where a new democracy found itself , amid difficult economic circumstances and in an ideologically polarized Europe , grappling simultaneously with intricate political changes and pressing social problems . 

  Notions of " responsibility " are difficult to detach from personal views as to the urgency of reform and the reasonableness or otherwise of conservative resistance and lower-class impatience . 

  To suggest that things might have been otherwise had important individuals or groups behaved differently is to ignore the situation within which they were acting , their perceptions of it and the traditions within which their outlook had been formed . 

  " Inevitable " is a word that historians should use sparingly , if at all , in relation to complex historical phenomena such as the failure and collapse of political regimes ; suffice it to say therefore that in the case of the Spanish Republic failure was always more likely than survival . 

  Why did Franco win the Civil War ? 

  Democracies , of course , often collapse without producing civil wars . 

  In Spain , civil war exploded in 1936 owing to the roughly equal popular support commanded by the two sides , the rebels' failure to achieve a swift victory , the Republic's arming of the union militias , and -- crucially -- the fascist powers' intervention on the Nationalists' side . 

  A war of years' rather than months' duration was then ensured by the Soviet Union's rallying to the Republic's aid . 

  Most writers agree that once the Civil War was under way , its outcome depended upon the manner in which , on the two sides , foreign aid and influence related to internal political and military considerations . 

  Military and economic historians continue to argue about the quantities and quality of aid received by the two sides , and the financial and economic costs thereof . 

  These were probably not , however , the deciding factors . 

  Quantities apart , it is clear that while Soviet aid to the Republic was principally calculated to prolong resistance , Axis help for Franco was aimed successfully at victory . 

  When to this is added the betrayal of the Republic by its supposed fellow democracies and the sorry farce of non-intervention , the Nationalists' advantage is clear and , by historians , little disputed . 

  A similar scholarly consensus exists over the Nationalists' vastly greater success in dealing with internal factionalism . 

  When it comes to the internal politics of Republican Spain , however , disagreement abounds . 

  The most intense , at times even bitter , debates have surrounded the question of Soviet aid to the Republic -- its political and , therefore , military cost . 

  Their starting point is , of course , the Republic's inability from late July 1936 to obtain help from elsewhere . 

  As the price of its support the Soviet Union , in the interests of its own foreign policy , required the dismantling of revolutionary changes , conventional rather than guerrilla or " revolutionary " war , the restoration of Republican authority and a massive enhancement of Communist power . 

  While few serious historians have defended Communist excesses , some have argued that it was only the strategy in whose name they were committed that enabled the Republic to fight on for as long as it did . 

  The sharpest criticisms of this approach have been made -- as they were at the time -- from extreme left-wing but non-Stalinist positions . 

  The Soviet Union , these critics argue , was uninterested in Republican victory and unwilling to provide sufficient resources to make it possible ; to make matters worse , the anti-revolutionary policies and generally repressive conduct of the Communists , by robbing much of the population within Republican Spain of anything for which to fight , brought about massive demoralization and weakened rather than strengthened the bases of the anti-fascist struggle . 

  In order to defeat an enemy who was always likely to be stronger in conventional military terms , the argument continues , what was required was a revolutionary war based upon a social transformation which as well as enthusing the population of Republican Spain might also have inspired to revolution that of the enemy zone . 

  The negative criticisms of Communist strategy and conduct are largely valid , though implicit in them is -- or ought to be -- an even greater criticism of the Anglo-French policies that deprived the Republic of aid save from a Soviet regime whose diplomatic overtures the British and French governments spurned . 

  Nevertheless , it seems highly improbable that had it been pursued the " revolutionary " alternative , deprived as it would have been of any significant outside help , would have proved any more successful . 

  Either of two sets of conditions might have brought the Spanish Civil War to a very different end : an immediate rallying of support from the Republic's fellow democracies , or Soviet assistance for a broad-based , revolutionary war rather than a sectarian , conventional one . 

  In the climate of the 1930s , neither was remotely likely . 

  Francoism and fascism 

  During the 1930s the words " fascism " and " fascist " were so much in vogue as to make inevitable their widespread application to the Nationalist cause and the emergent Franco regime . 

  While the words may have played little part in Nationalist propaganda , and the ideas they connoted have been uncongenial to many Catholics and erstwhile liberal monarchists within the Nationalist camp , nevertheless the prominence of the Falange and the involvement of Italy and Germany sufficed to satisfy most foreign observers , and by no means only those on the left , that the Spanish rebels were indeed " fascists " . 

  During the past twenty years , however , " fascism " has become the object of rigorous academic analysis , with the result that much effort has been expended in attempting to establish whether or not the label is appropriate in the Spanish case . 

  The majority of historians have approached the problem via a definition of fascism based upon the radical-nationalist ideas and distinctive " style " of the Italian model . 

  Their perfectly logical conclusions are that the Falange and its predecessor the JONS were the only unambiguously fascist organizations in pre-Civil War Spain ; that the CEDA in particular did not deserve the epithet " fascist " ; that after a sudden expansion during 1936 the Falange was politically neutered in April 1937 through its enforced merger with Carlism and the Catholic right ; and that the subsequent regime , utterly dominated by the non-Falangist Franco , was therefore not fascist -- whatever else it may have been . 

  Critics of this approach , while often accepting the usefulness of the Italian model in relation to Spain , have taken as their starting point the varied character of the Italian Fascist movement , its role as the militant defender of property and destroyer of the left , and the essential , rather than the external , characteristics of the Italian Fascist regime . 

  This leads them to conclude that between 1931 and 1936 the Spanish right as a whole played a role analogous to that of fascism in Italy a decade earlier . 

  Differences of ideology and programme within the right , they insist , were little greater than those within Italian fascism and in any case mattered little to thousands of right-wing militants , supporters and voters . 

  What was important was a shared antagonism towards democracy and the left and a common commitment to some sort of authoritarian , corporate state . 

  Leftists and Republicans were therefore entitled to feel that whether the right as a whole , or merely one element of it , achieved power , the consequences for them were likely to be more or less equally unpleasant . 

  If the pre-1936 right can thus be considered " objectively " fascist , it obviously follows that the same is true of the wartime alliance that emerged from it and of the Franco regime forged after October 1936 . 

  Of these two approaches , the first has the virtue of identifying differences of ideology which were unquestionably important to some members of each right-wing party and were later to influence the internal politics of the Franco regime . 

  Nevertheless , the second surely comes closer to reflecting the realities and passions of the 1930s . 

  For the hundreds of thousands of Spanish -- and non-Spanish -- democrats and leftists who fought and died in the Civil War or in the horrendous repression that followed , the forces against which they struggled differed in few essentials from those that had recently brought dictatorship and oppression to Italy , Germany and Austria . 

  If " fascism " appeared to them an appropriate name for their enemy , then perhaps comfortable historians half-a-century later should hesitate before declaring them wrong . 

  THE CUCKOO 

  The habits of the cuckoo are well-known . 

  Ogden Nash , the 20th century American poet , probably summed up popular attitudes about this bird when he wrote : 

  Cuckoos lead bohemian lives , 

  They fail as husbands and as wives -- 

  And therefore they cynically disparage 

  Everybody else's marriage . 

  But as we shall see they are most successful at breeding , sometimes producing as many as 25 offspring in one season . 

  The cuckoo is what is known as a brood parasite -- it lays its egg in the nest of a different , host , species of bird and then has nothing further to do with it . 

  The entire burden of hatching , feeding and caring for the young cuckoo falls on the hapless foster parents . 

  Not only that , but on hatching , the young cuckoo throws out the host species' own eggs or young so that it has no competition for the foster parents' time and attention . 

  Not all cuckoos are brood parasites and not all brood parasites are cuckoos . 

  About 80 species of birds worldwide have dispensed with the bothersome business of raising their own young and only about 50 of these are cuckoos of one sort or another . 

  The remainder include the African whydahs and indigo birds , the cowbirds of North and South America , the honeyguides and even a duck -- the black-headed duck of South America . 

  Conversely , there are many species of the cuckoo family which build a nest and incubate their own eggs in the conventional fashion . 

  Opposite A young cuckoo being fed by its foster parent , a tiny wren . 

  A cuckoo chick will have outgrown the host bird within days of hatching 

  All brood parasites show a range of fascinating adaptations in support of their unorthodox life style , but the best-known and most fully studied is undoubtedly the European cuckoo which is the species we shall concentrate on in this chapter . 

  The European cuckoo's strange behaviour was noted as long ago as 300 BC by the Greek philosopher Aristotle , who also recorded the young cuckoo's ejection of the host bird's eggs from the nest . 

  It is unlikely that many Europeans would have had access to Aristotle's writings , but the cuckoo's habits were certainly well enough known during the Middle Ages for them to be mentioned by Chaucer ( in The Parlement of Foules , 1382 ) , and for the term " cuckold " -- describing a man deceived by his wife -- to have passed into the English language . 

  However , it was not until scientific ornithology began to get into its stride in the l9th century that some of the more remarkable aspects of the cuckoo's behaviour began to be widely known . 

  They were considered so remarkable that many people , biologists among them , were unable to believe that they arose through natural selection . 

  The cuckoo's adaptations were simply too perfect to have evolved bit by bit , in piecemeal fashion . 

  It was thought they must have been conferred all at once in an act of divine creation . 

  However , such naive views , as we shall see later , were to be proved incorrect . 

  The European cuckoo , with its grey plumage and barred underside , bears a striking resemblance to the predatory sparrowhawk , pictured below . 

  Early in the 20th century , significant contributions were made to our knowledge of the cuckoo . 

  These were mainly through the work of one man , Edgar Chance . 

  Chance was a businessman rather than a biologist , but in his spare time he collected birds' eggs , particularly those of the cuckoo and its hosts . 

  During the 1920s and'30s , Chance had the now dubious honour of being one of the best-known egg-collectors in Britain . 

  His detailed observations helped to dispel popular misconceptions about the habits and behaviour of the cuckoo . 

  He himself would probably have claimed that his greatest achievement was to be able to predict accurately where and when a particular cuckoo would lay its eggs . 

  It was this that made it possible for the whole of the cuckoo's breeding cycle to be filmed , resulting in an early classic of wildlife photography , The Cuckoo's Secret . 

  Since Chance's day , other researchers have continued the work . 

  Most significant in recent years have been the field experiments carried out by the British ornithologists Nick Davies and Mike Brooke from the University of Cambridge , and the field observations of another British ornithologist , Ian Wyllie . 

  As a result , we now have a very detailed picture of the lifestyle of the cuckoo and can recognise it for what it is : not a case of divine creation , but a superb example of the complex adaptations that occur in the intricate interrelationship . 

  between a brood parasite and its host . 

  The cuckoo's zygodactyl toes , with two pointing forwards and two pointing back . 

  Species such as blackbirds and sparrows have three pointing forwards and one pointing back . 

  The cuckoo is a medium-sized bird , weighing about 120 g ( 4.2 oz ) -- slightly smaller than a pigeon . 

  In common with toucans , parrots and woodpeckers , cuckoos have two toes pointing forwards and two pointing back . 

  This is thought to facilitate moving around on twigs and branches which , for a bird that lays its eggs in nests that may be hidden in thick vegetation , is an advantage . 

  Male and female are very similar in appearance ; the male is slightly larger , but the difference is usually imperceptible . 

  A small proportion of females have a rusty-red plumage , distinct from the normal grey colour . 

  There is no male equivalent , and nor does there appear to be any particular explanation for the colour variation . 

  With its grey plumage , barred underside and hawk-like shape and silhouette , the European cuckoo looks deceptively like the predatory sparrowhawk -- the two are often confused . 

  This resemblance may not be a coincidence . 

  The cuckoo can not lay its egg while the future foster-parent is in residence ; it has to pick a time when the parent bird has left the nest -- and the eggs -- so that it can perform its surreptitious substitution . 

  The appearance of a hawk-like bird may provide just the encouragement the potential hosts need to make them abandon the nest for a while and take cover elsewhere . 

  This idea is supported by the fact that several species of cuckoos in other countries appear to mimic the appearance of hawks that are common locally . 

  Another possibility is that , by looking like a hawk , cuckoos are protecting themselves from predation -- a hawk is less likely to attack another hawk than some other , easier prey . 

  The cuckoo , especially the male when singing , spends a great deal of time sitting on exposed perches , making it particularly vulnerable . 

  Not only does it need to keep a constant lookout for the large hairy caterpillars that it prefers to eat ( particularly those of the magpie moth which other birds find distasteful ) , but it must also keep a close eye on the activities of potential hosts . 

  Mimicking a hawk could also be useful in Africa , the European cuckoo's wintering ground , where birds of prey are numerous . 

  Hairy caterpillars , such as this " woolly bear " or garden tiger moth caterpillar , are usually distasteful to birds , but not to the cuckoo . 

  The European cuckoo's breeding range extends across most of Europe and Asia . 

  It winters in Africa south of the Sahara and arrives in Britain around mid-April . 

  The cuckoo's year is well described by a traditional rhyme : 

  April come I will . 

  In May I've come to stay . 

  In June I change my tune , 

  And in July , away I fly . 

  Observation shows that this is broadly correct . 

  Certainly , cuckoos spend a very short time in Britain ( 12-15 weeks ) -- less than any other migrant . 

  Despite this , it is on their breeding grounds that they have been most studied . 

  Little is known about cuckoos in their African winter quarters . 

  The mellifluous and mysteriously ventriloquial call of the cuckoo is a sign that spring has arrived . 

  The call is uttered only by the male cuckoo , who arrives slightly before the female , and begins to call as soon as he reaches the breeding grounds . 

  The " song " consists of about ten " cuck-oos " separated from each other by one- or two-second intervals . 

  Some individuals carry on for longer , and one has been heard to call 270 times without a break . 

  The " song " is delivered from a prominent perch and calling is most frequent early in the day . 

  Its main function is to attract a female : male cuckoos do not appear to be territorial since the areas over which males sing often overlap as do the egg-laying ranges of females . 

  Cuckoos do have other calls . 

  Both sexes give a " wah-wah " cry , especially during aggressive encounters with other cuckoos . 

  The female also has a " bubble " call consisting of about 15 notes on a descending scale . 

  This call is most often given just after the female has laid an egg and may be used to attract males for further mating . 

  Although generally not territorial , cuckoos return regularly to the area in which they bred in previous years . 

  One of Edgar Chance's cuckoos , recognisable by its distinctive eggs , returned for no less than five consecutive years to the same common in southern England . 

  In addition to certain species of cuckoo , there are about 30 species of birds worldwide that are also brood parasites . 

  Above , the North American yellow warbler plays host to a brown-headed cowbird chick , as well as raising her own hatchlings . 

  As the ranges of the males overlap , it is hardly surprising that the females are regularly courted by several males during the course of the breeding season -- a female may have as many as four males in pursuit at the same time . 

  The male courts the female by singing and posturing , often with a small twig or leaf in his bill . 

  Mating itself has very rarely been observed . 

  Ian Wyllie , who studied cuckoos extensively in Cambridgeshire reed-beds , saw it just three times over a period of six years after thousands of hours of observation . 

  Both male and female call before mating , the male with his " cuck-oos " and the female with her " bubble " call . 

  The male approaches the female in a gliding flight , still calling as he does so . 

  He lands directly on the female's back , and mating takes place . 

  It is not known for certain if the male and female form a pair bond . 

  Ian Wyllie considered that they were promiscuous , with both male and female mating more or less indiscriminately with several partners . 

  This seems likely . 

  Although most birds are monogamous , promiscuity is not unusual among brood parasites . 

  After mating , the female is ready to lay her egg . 

  This act of stealth and deceit is far from straightforward , and it is now that we begin to see some of the more subtle and complex adaptations of the cuckoo to its parasitic way of life . 

  A cuckoo's egg is conspicuously larger than the host's eggs to our eyes but the egg is sufficiently similar in pattern and colour not to be detected by the foster parents . 

  The first problem that faces the cuckoo is to find a nest belonging to the right species of host . 

  Not all birds fall victim to the cuckoo -- many small birds that might appear to be ideal cuckoo hosts will not tolerate any strange egg in their nest and will remove it straight away . 

  Thus , while a hundred or so European species have been recorded as hosts , only a handful are used regularly . 

  In Britain the main hosts are the reed warbler , meadow pipit , dunnock and pied wagtail . 

  However , for each female , the choice is restricted further by the phenomenon known as egg-mimicry . 

  The cuckoo's ability to produce eggs that bear a striking resemblance to those of its host is one of the bird's best known adaptations . 

  It was once thought that the cuckoo could change the colour and pattern of its eggs at will , allowing it to lay in a range of different nests . 

  This is now known to be impossible . 

  The female cuckoo can mimic only one type of egg and must try to lay in a nest of this species if her offspring is to have a good chance of survival . 

  The degree of colour mimicry is often startling , and has resulted in the cuckoo showing perhaps the greatest degree of colour variation in its eggs in the entire avian world . 

  There are , therefore , " reed warbler " cuckoos , " meadow pipit " cuckoos , " pied wagtail " cuckoos and so on . 

  The major , and as yet unexplained , exceptions are the " dunnock " cuckoos , whose eggs do not resemble those of their host at all . 

  At one time it was thought that this was because the dunnock was a recent cuckoo host , but Chaucer's reference in The Parlement of Foules makes it clear that the dunnock was a popular cuckoo host as long ago as the 14th century . 

  Whatever the case , the dunnock seems tolerant of colour variation in its eggs , so perhaps the cuckoo has no particular need to mimic them . 

  Just how important the selection of the right host can be for the cuckoo has been demonstrated by Nick Davies and Mike Brooke in a series of ingenious experiments . 

  They made realistic models of different types of cuckoo eggs ( realistic enough to fool a leading British ornithologist who unwittingly recorded one as part of a clutch he discovered ) and placed them in the nests of reed warblers to examine the response of the hosts . 

  When model " pied wagtail " or " redstart " cuckoo eggs were placed in the nests , almost all were ejected . 

  When model " reed warbler " cuckoo eggs were used , none of them was thrown out . 

  It would seem that egg mimicry in cuckoos has evolved to its present level of sophistication because poorly matching eggs are ejected by the host . 

  The female cuckoo is thus very restricted as to where she can lay her eggs , and it is important that she keeps an eye on the whereabouts of potential hosts . 

  Furthermore , since she normally lays around 12 eggs in a season at a rate of one egg every two days , she needs to know the locations of several nests simultaneously . 

  She also needs to know what stage the host birds have reached in their own nesting cycle because the timing of her laying can be crucial . 

  Altogether , the female cuckoo has a great deal of spying to do . 

  Timing can be almost as important as selection of the right host species . 

  Almost all cuckoo hosts , like the reed warbler , lay one egg each day until their clutch of around five eggs is complete . 

  The best time for the cuckoo to lay its egg is after the hosts have started laying and before they have finished . 

  Ian Wyllie found that , of 90 reed warbler nests that had cuckoo eggs in them , 86 ( 95 per cent ) were parasitised during egg-laying and only four after the clutch was complete . 

  The dangers of laying too early or too late are simple . 

  If the egg is laid too early , as Davies and Brooke found with their model cuckoo eggs , the host throws it out or deserts the nest . 

  If the egg is laid after the host has begun incubation , the young cuckoo will probably hatch too late to eject its nest mates . 

  A cuckoo that finds a host's nest where incubation has already started will often rob the nest causing the unfortunate host to start a new clutch , thus providing the cuckoo with a further chance for parasitism . 

  Careful timing by the cuckoo is important in another respect . 

  One of Edgar Chance's main findings was that , unlike most other birds which lay in the morning , cuckoos lay their eggs in the afternoon . 

  This gives the cuckoo more time to find and watch a suitable nest . 

  If she laid at dawn , like most birds , she would have to have prepared the day before . 

  Davies and Brooke found that model eggs that were placed in the host's nest in the morning were more likely to be ejected than those placed there in the afternoon . 

  Even when she has selected a place and a time , the female cuckoo has still got the problem of introducing her egg into the host's nest in such a way that it will not be rejected . 

  At this stage , yet another set of variations in the cuckoo's virtuoso repertoire of adaptations comes into play . 

  The cuckoo prefers to lay its egg while the hosts are away from the nest . 

  If a laying cuckoo is seen by the hosts it is vigorously mobbed and chased and , more importantly from the cuckoo's point of view , its egg is more likely to be ejected . 

  However , Edgar Chance showed that a cuckoo using a meadow pipit's nest is nearly always attacked while she is laying . 

  Generally though , prior to laying an egg , the female cuckoo will watch the intended host's nest for several hours , sitting quietly in a tree or bush , waiting for her opportunity . 

  During this time the egg passes along her oviduct ( egg-laying tube ) so that it is ready for immediate extrusion when she arrives at the nest . 

  When the host leaves the nest , the cuckoo makes its approach in a long , silent hawk-like glide . 

  If , however , the host appears reluctant to leave the nest , the cuckoo has a more direct approach . 

  We saw this ourselves during the filming of a television sequence on the laying behaviour of the cuckoo . 

  A female cuckoo , ready to lay her egg , had apparently fixed on a particular reed warbler's nest as her destination . 

  Unfortunately for her , the host bird showed no inclination to leave the nest . 

  So , instead of approaching silently , the cuckoo crashed noisily into some nearby vegetation , causing a considerable commotion and frightening the host bird away . 

  A dunnock plays host to a young cuckoo . 

  Though cuckoos are well known for laying their eggs in the nests of other species , more species of the cuckoo family build nests and incubate their eggs than do not There are in fact 80 species that act as true parents to their young . 

  What followed was , in its own way , even more remarkable . 

  The cuckoo grabbed the side of the nest , picked up the reed warbler's egg in its beak and flew off . 

  The whole sequence of events lasted only eight seconds , and yet in that time the cuckoo had also managed to lay its own egg . 

  Most birds take about 20 minutes to lay an egg . 

  The ability of the cuckoo to lay its egg so quickly is a major adaptation of brood parasites . 

  For their body size , cuckoos lay remarkably small eggs . 

  The average cuckoo's egg weighs just 3 g ( 1:9 oz ) , while most birds of the same size lay eggs weighing about 10 g ( 1:3 oz ) . 

  This must be a factor in the cuckoo's ability to lay its eggs so rapidly , but it also has other advantages . 

  One is that small eggs hatch sooner than large ones . 

  It is vital for the young cuckoo to hatch either before , or at the same time as , its nest mates . 

  The combination of careful timing by the female cuckoo , together with a short incubation period , ensures that on most occasions this happens . 

  The incubation period of a cuckoo's egg is about 11 days , while that for host species is slightly longer -- 12 days for the reed warbler and dunnock , 13 to 14 days for the meadow pipit , pied wagtail and redstart . 

  Swooping onto a reed warbler's nest , this female cuckoo removes one of the host bird's eggs and lays one of her own to replace it in a matter of seconds . 

  Small eggs also mimic those of the host species much more closely . 

  When Nick Davies and Mike Brooke placed 10 g-sized model " reed warbler " cuckoo's eggs in reed warbler nests , they found that about half of them were ejected , whereas none of the model 3 g normal-sized ones were . 

  Finally , laying such small eggs may enable the cuckoo to produce more of them . 

  Although around 12 eggs in a season is normal , one female observed during filming of a television programme laid 25 . 

  There is one other bizarre adaptation used by the female cuckoo in laying her eggs . 

  The opening of the oviduct can be protruded from the body , allowing the bird to " squirt " her egg into position . 

  The eggs may land with a bit of a thump , but there is another adaptation to take care of that : cuckoo eggs have unusually thick shells . 

  The advantage of this method of delivery is that , as well as being quicker , it allows the cuckoo to use nests that would otherwise be inaccessible . 

  Young cuckoos are sometimes reared in the most unlikely places . 

  They have been found inside nest boxes with tiny entrance holes designed for tits , as well as in the delicate domed nests of such species as the wren . 

  This is an advantage that the cuckoo is well advised to exploit with care -- clearly a young cuckoo reared in a blue tit's nest box would never be able to escape when it was mature . 

  A cuckoo chick , less than one day old instinctively completes the Herculean feat of ejecting one of its host's eggs . 

  Before the cuckoo abandons its offspring to the care of the foster parents , there is one other action she usually carries out . 

  This is a rather strange piece of behaviour , which gave rise in the l9th century to the belief that the female cuckoo swallowed her egg after laying it and then regurgitated it into the host's nest . 

  The evidence for this came from birds collected near the host's nest , whose throats were often found to contain an egg . 

  The truth is that , as she is laying , the cuckoo removes and eats one of the host's eggs . 

  It might be thought that this was an essential part of the cuckoo's deception -- that by leaving the same number of eggs in the nest , the cuckoo might fool the host bird into thinking that nothing had happened . 

  The evidence , however , seems to contradict this . 

  Reed warblers are no more likely to eject a model cuckoo's egg when it is simply added to those already in the nest than they are when a substitution is carried out . 

  One possible explanation is that , if the cuckoo did not take an egg , the host might have too many eggs to incubate effectively . 

  Certainly , reed warblers with an additional egg in the clutch often fail to hatch all their own eggs . 

  But perhaps the most attractive explanation is that the cuckoo is simply snatching a quick meal . 

  Generally , the cuckoo will not go on to take more than one egg , for , presumably , while the host tolerates the substitution or addition of an egg , it will not tolerate the loss of one . 

  A missing egg is presumably an indication that a predator is around , and the bird deserts the nest . 

  With her egg laid , and with the bonus of one of the host's eggs to sustain her , the female cuckoo's maternal role is at an end . 

  From now on , her offspring is on its own . 

  Through incubation and fledging , it is entirely dependent on the care of its adopted parents . 

  However , the mother does not leave the young cuckoo without instinctive resources , for the newly hatched chick demonstrates what is perhaps the most remarkable of all the numerous and varied adaptations of the cuckoo -- the ruthless ejection of the host's eggs or nestlings from the nest . 

  The cuckoo's ejection behaviour was first described in detail by Sir Edward Jenner , the inventor of vaccination , in 1788 . 

  When his observations were first published , no one believed them . 

  It is not hard to see why : even today the story seems incredible . 

  The young cuckoo hatches after about 11 days . 

  Some eight hours later , and for the next four days , it sets about the task of ejecting its companions from the nest . 

  Though still blind and naked , the chick manoeuvres itself inside the nest until an egg is lodged between its back and the side of the nest . 

  Then , heaving with its legs and holding its tiny wings backwards to keep the egg in position , the young hatchling jerks the egg over the side of the nest . 

  Chicks are treated in an identical fashion . 

  The foster parents remain unconcerned as their own eggs or nestlings follow each other to the ground , even when they can see what is going on . 

  During filming , we even saw eggs being pushed up and out of the nest while the reed warbler host was still sitting on them . 

  The eggs simply plopped out in front of the host bird , who carried on incubating any remaining eggs as though nothing had happened . 

  Sometimes young cuckoos are too vigorous in their attempts to remove their nest mates and fall out of the nest themselves . 

  Apart from this , their only problem seems to arise when two or , rarely , three female cuckoos choose to lay their eggs in the same nest . 

  When this happens , the first hatched , or strongest , ejects the others . 

  In one case , in which three different cuckoos parasitised the nest of a great reed warbler , one chick was thrown out soon after hatching : the other two then tried to eject each other for four days . 

  Eventually , they both fell out . 

  But in another case , described by Chance , a gardener found two cuckoo chicks in a dunnock's nest and both were reared successfully . 

  Very occasionally the young cuckoo fails to remove its host's eggs and the young cuckoo and chicks are reared together . 

  This is most likely to happen where the host is a hole nester , like a robin , and where the eggs or chicks are difficult to eject . 

  If all goes well , however , the young cuckoo soon has the nest to itself , together with the undivided attention of its foster parents . 

  It grows rapidly . 

  By the time it is four days old , it is as heavy as one of its parents ; after three weeks it weighs four times as much as they do , and dwarfs them both . 

  By being reared alone , it gets all the food its foster parents can bring and it has a useful adaptation that ensures that the food keeps on coming -- a huge , startlingly red gape . 

  A nestling's gape , or wide open beak , provides a stimulus to the parents to feed it . 

  The cuckoo's cavernous red gape may be irresistible to the overworked foster parents . 

  After about three weeks , the young cuckoo is ready to leave the nest . 

  Even then , it is looked after for a further two or three weeks . 

  Finally , it is ready for independence . 

  It will take to the air and leave Britain for Africa where it will winter , before returning the next year to become a brood parasite in its own right . 

  Opposite A pair of reed warblers work flat out to keep the young cuckoo satisfied . 

  The life cycle of the cuckoo raises the question of why host birds should accept a brood parasite's eggs , and why they should feed this alien monster in their nest ? 

  The answer is that they can not help themselves . 

  They are programmed by natural selection to behave in certain ways and cuckoos and other brood parasites are simply exploiting these fixed behavioural patterns . 

  Natural selection favours those individuals that can tell when they have been parasitised and eject the cuckoo's eggs . 

  This may already have happened in those species that will not tolerate a strange egg in the nest . 

  On the other hand , the cuckoo is subject to natural selection too and will evolve strategies to defeat those adopted by its hosts . 

  And the pressure of natural selection on the cuckoo is considerably greater than that on the host species . 

  The cuckoo is dependent for its survival on its hosts . 

  If all potential hosts were to reject it , the cuckoo would become extinct . 

  The host species on the other hand could survive being parasitised since only a small proportion suffer the attentions of the cuckoo , and most of these will breed again to produce their own offspring . 

  To put it another way , there is an evolutionary arms race between the cuckoo and its hosts , but the struggle is not an equal one . 

  The cuckoo is always a few steps in the lead , because of its extraordinary survival factors . 

  It is these adaptations which make it such a fascinating bird . 

  Once fledged , young cuckoos stay around the nest site demanding more food from their foster parents for several days . 

  PARASITISING YOUR OWN 

  The success of a brood parasite like the European cuckoo depends on how well it can " dupe " its host , whether reed warbler or dunnock . 

  This often involves a whole range of elaborate deceptions . 

  How much simpler it would be to parasitise a member of your own species . 

  This is exactly what a number of species of birds have done -- golden eye , European starling , moorhen and North American cliff swallow among them . 

  Until recently , it was not appreciated how widespread this kind of behaviour is , mainly because of the difficulty of egg-detection . 

  It is one thing to distinguish a cuckoo's egg from those of its host , but quite another to tell apart the eggs of two different starlings . 

  Most of the birds that parasitise their own species lay one or more eggs in the nests of other birds , and then lay and rear a separate clutch themselves . 

  They are not always very successful . 

  Moorhens , for example , are rather poorly adapted to parasitising their own . 

  They dump their eggs in other nests at any stage of incubation , with the result that the success rate is low . 

  Few extra off-spring are produced . 

  The cliff swallow , however , is much more sophisticated . 

  In one respect it is unique : it has developed the ability to move eggs from its own nest to another by carrying them in its beak . 

  It also times the transfer of its eggs extremely carefully so that most of them hatch in the hosts' nests at exactly the right time . 

  As a result , this can be a very successful strategy for some swallows , allowing them to produce extra off-spring at very little cost to themselves . 

  A recent discovery has shown that some North American cliff swallows actually carry eggs from their own nest to other swallows' nests nearby . 

  They will then return to their own nest to lay and rear a clutch . 

  Such a strategy increases the reproductive success of these individuals . 

  ANIS 

  The anis are group-living cuckoos found in Central and South America . 

  They are odd-looking birds with even odder habits . 

  There are three species . 

  The best known is the groove-billed ani , whose extraordinary breeding behaviour has been studied by Sandy Verhencamp in Costa Rica . 

  Groove-billed anis live in groups of up to four pairs . 

  They share a territory as well as a communal nest . 

  All the members of the group help to build the nest , and when it's complete all the females lay their eggs in this one " basket " . 

  Incubation is also shared . 

  Such extreme sociability is unusual among birds ; but the appearance of domestic harmony within the ani groups is deceptive . 

  In reality , the females are locked in fierce and intense competition . 

  One thing that had puzzled early observers was the litter of ani eggs strewn beneath the nest . 

  It was Verhencamp who discovered the truth -- female anis throw each other's eggs out of the nest . 

  Only a certain number of eggs can be incubated efficiently , and each female in the group tries to ensure that those eggs are hers . 

  To achieve this , each female visits the nest before she starts laying and throws out one or more of the existing eggs . 

  As soon as she starts laying herself , however , she has to stop doing this . 

  A female ani can not tell her own eggs from those of other females , so she would risk throwing out her own eggs if she did not . 

  All three species of anis , including the smooth-billed ani , are group-living cuckoos . 

  Several pairs share a territory as well as a communal nest . 

  Above , an adult feeds the group " s chicks . 

  There is , of course , great competition to be the last to lay , and the privilege is taken by the dominant female . 

  This means that she can throw out the eggs of her nest mates , but they have little chance to throw out hers . 

  The subordinate females do have one or two ways of retaliating -- they tend to go on laying longer and produce more eggs than the dominant female , and they also produce the occasional late egg some time after they have laid the rest of their clutch . 

  By adding to the clutch , they take the risk that some of the eggs will not hatch ; but the more of their own eggs are in the nest , the better their chances of producing offspring . 

  Nevertheless , the dominant female still ends up with most eggs . 

  CHICK MIMICRY 

  The indigo birds and whydahs of Africa are brood parasites just like the European cuckoo , but there are some interesting differences in the ways in which they have adapted to a parasitic lifestyle . 

  For one thing , they do not eject the eggs or young of their hosts -- waxbills -- from the nest . 

  For another , instead of mimicking the eggs of their hosts , they mimic the appearance and behaviour of their young . 

  In both indigo birds and whydahs , the males are most brightly coloured than the females . 

  Male indigo birds sport beautiful metallic blue plumage , while male whydahs sometimes possess spectacularly long tails . 

  Males have display or song posts to which they attract females for mating . 

  A successful male may lure and mate with as many as 20 different females ; less popular ones may fail to mate at all . 

  As in many other polygamous birds , the male plays no part in nesting and neither , in the case of these birds , does the female . 

  After mating , the female indigo bird or whydah lays her egg in the nest of a waxbill . 

  Each species parasitises a different species of waxbill : the village indigo bird parasitises the red-billed firefinch ; the paradise whydah preys on the melba finch ; and the straw-tailed whydah uses the purple grenadier . 

  This link with a particular host is closely associated with chick mimicry . 

  Young waxbills have complex gape and mouth markings which are mimicked exactly by the brood parasite concerned . 

  Interestingly , there are three species of waxbill that share identical mouth markings and all are parasitised by the pintailed whydah . 

  Not only do the young whydahs mimic the appearance of the host's young , they also copy the way it feeds . 

  Waxbills have a special feeding technique . 

  The parent partially digests food in its crop . 

  It then sticks its beak deep into the chick's mouth and literally pumps the food into its throat . 

  In order to breathe during this operation , the young waxbill has to adopt a particular posture ; young whydahs and indigo birds adopt this too . 

  A further refinement of chick mimicry is demonstrated by a tropical Asian cuckoo called the koel , which parasitises crows . 

  Here the chicks mimic the plumage of the host's young . 

  The male adult koel also mimics the plumage of its hosts : the crows are vigorously territorial and while they are chasing away the intruding male , the female koel can sneak in and lay her egg . 

  Koels also live in Australia but here they parasitise other species , and the young do not mimic the host . 

  They do , however , eject their nest mates from the nest . 

  As well as looking like their host's young , the chicks of some brood parasites also sound like them . 

  Young great spotted cuckoos reared by pied crows , and striped cuckoos reared by arrow-marked babblers , are both known to give begging calls identical to those of the host young . 

  Vocal mimicry even occurs in a brood parasite that kills its nest mates . 

  The young greater honeyguide , which parasitises red-throated bee-eaters , has a hooked tip to its bill with which it pecks its nest mates to death . 

  Nevertheless , the young honeyguide still mimics the calls of the young bee-eaters . 

  This shows the remarkable similarity that has evolved in the gape patterns of the chicks of two species of whydah birds and the chicks of the birds that they parasitise . 

  TOOL USERS 

  Technology is so pervasive , so much an intrinsic part of modern life , that we tend to take it for granted . 

  It is easy to forget that it had to start somewhere . 

  Yet the first crude tools our ancestors made -- from flakes of rock , bits of timber and other natural materials around them -- were the precursors of the computers , turbines , aeroplanes and all the other pieces of machinery essential to the modern world . 

  Until recently , it was considered that this ability to make and use tools was one of the defining characteristics of the human race . 

  Tool using was considered an indicator of intelligence , and it was one of the things that separated Homo sapiens from the rest of the animal kingdom . 

  As is so often the case , however , nature refuses to conform to such a convenient theory . 

  In recent years , many examples of tool use in the animal world have come to light and there are no doubt others that are still waiting to be discovered . 

  Animals are no strangers to " technology " and some of the ways in which they use it are surprising as well as being remarkably sophisticated . 

  Before looking at some examples of tool using among animals , it would be as well to be clear about what we mean by the term . 

  The concept is not as straight forward as it seems . 

  The nests of ants , bees , wasps and other social insects may appear to be marvellously complex examples of animal technology , but they are not examples of tool use . 

  The most widely accepted definition of tool use is that it is the use of some external object as an extension of the body to attain an immediate objective . 

  This definition would exclude a gull or crow that drops a shellfish from a height onto a hard surface . 

  But it would include an Egyptian vulture that throws a stone at an ostrich's egg to break it open . 

  The vulture is manipulating the stone and using it as an extension of its beak to crack the egg . 

  A baby orang utan gets to grips with a film camera ! 

  The ability to use tools is best documented amongst the primates . 

  There are also different ways of interpreting tool-using behaviour . 

  A bolas spider , swinging its sticky lure through the air to capture a flying moth , is behaving in a way that is innate . 

  It has not learned this behaviour ; it was born with it , though it gradually learns the finer points . 

  Clearly , in this case , tool using is a part of the repertoire of adaptations that this particular species of spider has evolved . 

  On the other hand , a thirsty chimpanzee in a Tanzanian forest may find some water in a tree hole , but be unable to reach it with its mouth . 

  It will collect some leaves , chew them until they form a crude sponge , then soak the sponge in the pool so that it can squeeze the water into its mouth . 

  In this case , the chimpanzee is showing what the psychologists would call " insight " . 

  It has identified a problem and has worked out a solution probably by trial and error ; and the solution has involved the making and using of a tool . 

  It has not inherited this behaviour ; it has either worked it out for itself , or learned it by observing another chimpanzee . 

  Tool using thus covers a broad range of activities throughout the animal kingdom , from the mindless and mechanical to the considered and imaginative . 

  It is also found at all levels , not just among our nearest evolutionary ancestors , the monkeys and the apes . 

  In fact , examples of tool using can be found among even the most unpromising candidates -- the invertebrates , those animals without backbones . 

  Ant-lions and worm-lions live in arid areas throughout the tropics . 

  Although their names make them sound like large predators , they are actually tiny insect larvae . 

  Ant-lions ( Myrmeleon ) are members of the lacewing flies , while worm-lions , which comprise two genera , Vermilio and Lampromyia , are true flies . 

  Both have developed the same unusual method of trapping prey -- they dig small pitfall traps for it . 

  The funnel-shaped pits are constructed in dry soil or sand using a novel excavation technique . 

  The larva heaps sand or soil onto its head and jaws and then flicks it with some force up and behind it , working in a circle to produce a conical pit . 

  Once the trap is complete the little animal burrows into the bottom of the pit and there lies in wait for unsuspecting prey . 

  Ant-lions , as their name implies , prey mainly on ants . 

  The lion part of their names comes from the ferocity with which they attack any ant that comes within range of their huge jaws . 

  Ants stumble into the pit by accident and , because it is constructed of friable soil or sand and has steep sides , they have to struggle to get out . 

  The task is made more difficult , if not impossible , by the ant-lion . 

  While the ant is scrabbling about trying to get up the sides of the pit , the ant-lion is busy chucking sand at it , again using its head and jaws as a " catapult " . 

  Eventually the shower of sand may knock the ant within the ant-lion's reach . 

  Once seized , the ant is dragged into the sand at the bottom of the burrow where it is consumed . 

  The behaviour of worm-lions , which also flick sand at their prey , is essentially the same as that of the ant-lion . 

  Worm-lions , however , also demonstrate another technical skill . 

  When the larva is about to shed its skin and change into a pupa ( which it does prior to emerging as a real fly ) , it exudes a sticky fluid . 

  Grains of sand stick to this fluid which helps to hold the skin to the soil , thereby helping the pupating worm-lion to extricate itself . 

  Without the sand particles to produce friction , the worm-lion would find it much more difficult to complete this crucial part of its development . 

  An ant-lion larva lies in wait at the bottom of its specially constructed pit . 

  It catapults grains of sand at passing ants in an attempt to knock them down into the pit and eat them . 

  Several other insects attach extraneous objects or material to themselves , but for very different reasons . 

  A particularly intricate example involves the larva of another lacewing fly , the green lacewing . 

  The larvae of this fly feed on woolly alder aphids . 

  Like many other aphids , the woolly alder has a mutually beneficial arrangement with a particular species of ant -- the ants protect the aphids from other insect predators and in return the aphids provide the ants with highly nutritious honeydew . 

  So , if the green lacewing larva is to enjoy a decent meal of woolly alder aphids , it has to find a way of avoiding being attacked by the ants . 

  It does this by disguising itself as an aphid , in order to avoid being detected by the ants . 

  Woolly alder aphids are so named because they produce clumps of woolly wax from their bodies . 

  The lacewing larva takes this from the aphids and sticks it on its own back , fooling the ants into thinking that it is simply another aphid . 

  Experiments in which the wax is removed from the fly larvae show that the larvae immediately become vulnerable to attack from the ants , and they quickly try to re-cover themselves . 

  As might be expected , some of the most intriguing examples of invertebrate tool use are to be found among those master-builders of the insect world , the ants , bees and wasps -- collectively known as the Hymenoptera . 

  Several species of ant of the genus Aphaenogaster use tools to carry soft , or semi-liquid foods . 

  The tool consists of a piece of leaf , wood , sand or mud , with which the food is picked up . 

  The ant then carries its " plate " and food back to its nest . 

  By using a tool the ant is able to transport ten times as much food per trip as it could have done otherwise . 

  The ferocious weaver ants of South-east Asia and South Africa use a highly unorthodox tool to help them construct their nests . 

  The nest , located in the branches of a tree , consists of leaves stuck together -- with silk . 

  And the tool that they use to do this is their own larvae . 

  The ants' larvae possess silk glands with which they spin their own pupal cocoons . 

  The adult ants exploit this , using the larva like a tube of glue to stick the leaves of the nest together . 

  Holding the larva in its jaws , an adult points the larva's silk glands at the leaves and , as the silk is extruded , the leaves , which are held together by many other ants , are glued . 

  This brilliant piece of " natural ingenuity " has evolved through natural selection . 

  Although it may appear otherwise , such behaviour requires no conscious decision making by the ant . 

  The sandwasps Ammophila and Sphex also use a tool -- a sort of miniature hammer -- as an aid in construction . 

  These wasps , which are common in sandy areas , dig a small burrow in which to lay their eggs . 

  Each egg , or rather the larva that hatches from it , is provided with a supply of fresh food in the form of a caterpillar , which the female paralyses with her sting . 

  After laying her egg and placing one or more caterpillars inside the nest , the wasp closes the burrow entrance with pebbles and soil . 

  She then picks up a stone in her jaws and , vibrating her head at high speed , bangs down the soil . 

  Sometimes the wasp may even insert a small twig into the soil and jiggle it about to help settle the material . 

  The end result is that the burrow with its precious egg and living food supply is completely concealed . 

  Weaver ants use their larvae as portable tubes of glue , to stick together the leaves that form their nest . 

  A rather different form of technical skill is shown by a common and familiar resident of the seashore , the hermit crab . 

  This uses the shells of whelks , winkles and other gastropods in much the same way as a medieval knight used a suit of armour -- to protect the soft and vulnerable parts of the body from attack . 

  Hermit crabs , however , do not simply put on a shell as if it were a new pullover ; they show two remarkable adaptations to the problems of " wearing " the shells of alien snails . 

  First , unlike all other crustaceans , the hermit crab's abdomen is distinctly asymmetrical , coiling in a most bizarre fashion . 

  Snails' shells are of course also asymmetrically coiled , so the hermit crab has plainly had to adapt its own anatomy in order to fit into its adopted shelter . 

  Second , at the very tip of their abdomen they possess a hook-like structure which enables them to hold on to the shell . 

  Anyone who has tried to remove a hermit crab from its shell will know how tenacious these creatures can be . 

  Yet , when the time comes for a hermit crab to change shell , having outgrown its present one , it can accomplish the change over in just a few seconds . 

  Some hermit crabs , like Dardanus , seek yet further protection from more powerful predators and carry sea anemones , such as Calliactis , around on their shells . 

  Sea anemones possess stinging cells in their tentacles , which they use to protect themselves and to capture food . 

  The crab effectively parasitises these protective devices for its own ends by placing the anemone on its shell . 

  Why the sea anemone stays there and whether it gains anything from this relationship is not known . 

  A hermit crab carrying a sea anemone around on its shell . 

  Exactly what the sea anemone gains from this relationship is not known , but crabs with anemones on their shells are known to be much less vulnerable to attack by octopuses . 

  Another crab , Melia tessellata , has taken this association one stage further , and carries a small anemone in each of its pincers . 

  This must be one of the most ingenious cases of tool use by any animal . 

  If approached by a predator , the crab confronts it with its outstretched claws bearing the stinging anemones , rather as primitive man might have held a wolf at bay by using a flaming torch . 

  The crab , Melia tessellata , menacingly waves its two anemones to threaten its enemies . 

  Crabs normally catch food with their pincers . 

  In the case of Melia tessellata , these pincers , which are specially adapted for holding the anemones without damaging them , are otherwise occupied . 

  Melia tessellata , therefore , uses a pair of specially modified walking legs to pass food to its mouth , and is thus able to keep permanent hold of its two captives . 

  Interestingly , even if the anemones are removed from the crab's claws , it still uses its walking legs for feeding . 

  Fortunately , crabs have enough legs -- ten in all -- to be able to spare a couple . 

  Usually the hermit crab utilises a discarded whelk or winkle shell to protect it from predators , but when none is available a plastic jar will do . 

  The diversity of form and behaviour among the several thousand species of fish in the world is enormous , but there are probably just two , very different , examples of tool use among them . 

  The first concerns a small fish Butis which occurs in the Cigenter river in Java and which was discovered by the German wildlife photographer , Dieter Plage . 

  He was sitting beside the river watching dead leaves floating downstream when he noticed that one leaf had suddenly started to behave very peculiarly -- it was floating upstream . 

  Lunging forward with a net , he caught not just a leaf but a tiny fish as well . 

  When the two were placed in an aquarium the association became clear . 

  This small fish , new to science and a member of the family called sleepers , swims upside down using some of its fins to hold onto the leaf , and the other fins to propel it through the water . 

  This behaviour is unique among fish . 

  Its function is not known as yet , but the leaf may serve as mobile camouflage to protect the fish from the eight species of kingfisher which feed along this river or it may act as a " stalking horse " as the fish pursues its prey . 

  There can be no doubt , however , about the function of the second case of tool use among fish . 

  The archer fish lives in mangrove swamps in South-east Asia , where it frequently searches for food near the surface of the water . 

  When it spots an insect on overhanging vegetation , it lines itself up and then shoots a jet of water from its mouth to knock the insect out of the air . 

  The archer fish is here using water as a tool , much as the ant-lion uses sand , to help it capture its prey . 

  The archer fish possesses a number of structural and behavioural adaptations associated with its ability to shoot down flies . 

  The jet of water , which can be projected over a metre , is produced by compression of the gill covers . 

  This forces water through a tube formed by the tongue pressed against a groove in the roof of the mouth . 

  When taking aim , the fish also has to make allowance for refraction -- the bending of light as it travels from the air into the water . 

  If it aimed at the point where the insect appeared to be , it would miss . 

  It therefore has to aim at a carefully judged angle to the apparent direction if it is going to score a hit . 

  The fish possesses a further adaptation to enhance its accuracy : binocular vision . 

  The archer fish's large eyes can be aligned so that , like our own , they produce a three-dimensional image , making it possible to judge distances . 

  Although it occurs among mammals and birds , few other fish possess binocular vision . 

  The combined effect of these adaptations is to make the archer fish a highly efficient predator of insects . 

  When prey is about one metre away , the fish's aim is almost perfect . 

  At distances greater or less than this , accuracy decreases . 

  Immediately the archer fish has fired , it swims rapidly to the point where its prey will fall into the water , ready to catch and eat it . 

  Some archer fish are able to line up their prey so precisely that it falls directly into the water below , and within easy reach of the fish , instead of being knocked inconveniently into the distance . 

  Opposite An archer fish achieves a direct hit . 

  The technical skill of the house martin enables it to construct gravity-defying mud nests beneath the eaves of houses . 

  Some of the finest examples of technical skill are to be found among birds . 

  The bowerbirds of Australia and South-east Asia , for example , construct fantastic bowers from sticks as a means of attracting the females . 

  Most species decorate these avian palaces with flowers , mollusc shells and any stray human artefacts , such as clothes pegs , they can find . 

  Three species , the satin , spotted and regent bowerbirds , also " paint " their bowers with a mixture of charcoal , fruit and mud . 

  The satin bowerbird uses a " brush " , usually a small flake of bark , to apply the paint to its bower ; the other two species use their beaks . 

  Another ingenious construction technique is demonstrated by the house martin . 

  In common with other members of the swallow family , house martins build elaborate mud nests precariously slung beneath the eaves of a house . 

  By what magic do they get their nest to stay there ? 

  If you or I were to mix mud and water and place it in the same position it would fall off . 

  However , if you watch house martins you will see that they do not simply " plonk " their mud pellets onto the wall ; instead , they place them in position while rapidly vibrating the head . 

  This has an effect rather like that of a cement mixer . 

  It creates a thixotrophic -- or " non-drip " -- mixture which does not slither down the wall or fall off when put in position . 

  This behaviour is almost too quick to see with the naked eye . 

  It was described to us by an experienced wildlife film-maker , Alastair MacEwen , who was filming house martins with a high speed camera . 

  When he played the film back at normal speed , which then makes the birds appear in slow motion , he could see what the birds were actually doing . 

  As with other examples of apparent technical brilliance , it is natural selection that has produced this innate behaviour , rather than any genius on the part of the house martin . 

  " Cement mixing " has clear survival value -- house martins that did not practise it and whose nests fell off the wall would have few surviving offspring . 

  It has , therefore , through natural selection , become part of the behavioural repertoire of the house martins . 

  As well as their skills in construction , birds demonstrate considerable technical ingenuity in their efforts to get food . 

  Several birds , including crows and gulls , carry shellfish into the air and drop them onto hard surfaces in order to break them open . 

  Although this habit does not qualify as conventional tool use , the behaviour of the Egyptian vulture certainly does . 

  For many years there were rumours of Egyptian vultures breaking open ostrich eggs by throwing stones at them at close range . 

  The behaviour is now well documented . 

  The vulture selects a rock , picks it up in its beak and , standing about half to one metre away , throws it at the egg with considerable force . 

  The stones weigh 50 to 500 g ( 1.8 to 18 oz ) and are propelled by a flick of the neck . 

  About half the throws hit their target and it generally takes eight direct hits and about five minutes to crack the egg open . 

  On some occasions , instead of throwing the stone , the vulture may use it to hammer the egg . 

  This form of predation by Egyptian vultures is thought to be a significant source of egg loss for many ostriches . 

  The Egyptian vulture does not seem to use its throwing abilities against other animals . 

  One was once seen to use a stone to kill a monitor lizard , but this was probably a mistake ! 

  The only bird that regularly directs missiles at other species is the Australian brush turkey , which kicks sand and stones at lizards when it is competing with them for food . 

  The most common tools used by birds in feeding , however , are not missiles but " probes " . 

  In Australia , the orange-winged sitella , a nuthatch-like bird , uses strips of wood or bark to winkle insect larvae out of crevices . 

  Similar behaviour occurs in the American brown-headed nuthatch . 

  But the bird that is best known for extracting insects from wood by means of a tool is the woodpecker finch of the Galapagos Islands . 

  This is one of 14 species of bird referred to as Darwin's finches . 

  During a visit to the Galapagos in 1835 , Charles Darwin was fascinated by these birds , and they eventually played a central role in developing his theory of evolution through natural selection . 

  Surprisingly , Darwin made no mention of the woodpecker finch's remarkable tool-using behaviour , and it was not until 1919 that it was first described . 

  A woodpecker finch teases out a grub with a twig . 

  The woodpecker finch wields a cactus spine or specially prepared twig to insert into insect holes . 

  Sometimes the prey is impaled , at other times the tool simply helps manoeuvre the larva into a position in which the bird can reach it with its beak . 

  The woodpecker finch can even modify its tools to suit the situation ; cactus spines may be cut down until they are the correct length , and twigs may have their side branches nipped off . 

  One other interesting example of feeding technology is the use of bait to catch prey . 

  Bait fishing has been reported among pied kingfishers , sunbitterns ( only in captivity ) and black kites , but the best known instance occurs in the green heron . 

  This is a geographically widespread species and bait fishing has been recorded among green herons in North America , Africa and Japan . 

  What happens is this : the heron selects its bait , walks to the water's edge and waits until it spots a fish . 

  It then throws the bait onto the water and as the fish moves towards it , the heron lunges forward and seizes its prey . 

  The type of bait used varies : in North America the main items are bread , fish food pellets , feathers or mayflies . 

  In Japan the herons also use berries , twigs , leaves and a range of insects including flies , cicadas and grasshoppers : in addition the Japanese green heron not only uses these naturally occurring baits , but also makes lures by breaking twigs into pieces of an appropriate size . 

  That this form of tool use is learned rather than inherited , and requires a reasonable amount of skill , is illustrated by the fact that juvenile herons are not good at it . 

  This is because they select inappropriate bait , mainly twigs and leaves . 

  Although adult herons sometimes catch fish using these particular baits , they are much more successful when using insects . 

  Birds , fish and invertebrates provide some fascinating instances of the use of tools , but it is only when we come to the mammals , and particularly the primates , that tool using begins to approach anything like its full potential . 

  Apart from primates , some of the best known tool users among the mammals are the African and Asian elephants , whose prehensile trunk gives them a considerable advantage when it comes to holding and manipulating objects . 

  Captive and wild elephants have been observed holding sticks in their trunks to scratch themselves and using leafy branches as gigantic fly swats . 

  Their ability to throw things with the trunk is also well known ; in zoos it is not unknown for elephants to hurl lumps of their own dung at keepers and visitors . 

  Wild elephants , however , seem less likely to throw things . 

  Their size alone is enough to intimidate any other animal that may threaten them . 

  Wild African and Asian elephants frequently throw dust , vegetation and water onto their bodies . 

  The water helps to keep the elephant cool and clean ; and the dust may encrust the animal's skin and provide an extra layer of protection from biting flies . 

  There are some instances of sophisticated tool use by elephants . 

  One of these occurred when several animals encountered a wire fence which they were unable to push over . 

  To surmount this problem , the elephants started tearing down trees , which they laid on the fence until it collapsed , allowing them to step over it . 

  Wire fences are not something that wild elephants encounter every day , so this behaviour could hardly have been learned , still less inherited . 

  It would seem that the elephants were able to understand the problem and work out a possible solution to it . 

  And the solution worked . 

  The ground squirrel is another mammal that has adopted the practice of throwing things -- primarily at its main predators , snakes . 

  California ground squirrels will even start throwing sand at the mere sound of a rattlesnake . 

  Among carnivores , bears and the sea otter are the animals that most regularly use tools . 

  Polar bears for example will occasionally throw lumps of ice or rocks at seals while hunting them , and in captivity they regularly throw objects around , apparently in play . 

  Other bears will also use tools in captivity ; spectacled bears use leafy branches , provided for them to eat , to knock fruit off overhanging branches or to retrieve floating bread from water . 

  Underwater , a Californian sea otter carries a rock between its paws , and a sea urchin on its belly . 

  It will use the rock to break the urchin open . 

  Opposite The Indian elephant's ability to manipulate heavy objects has long been exploited by man . 

  The charismatic sea otter , which inhabits the coastal waters off the west coast of North America , is one of the best known tool users . 

  These marine otters of California regularly open mollusc shells , whilst floating on their backs , by banging them against a rock balanced on their bellies . 

  The usual sequence of events is for the otter to dive and then surface clutching both a mollusc and a rock . 

  Turning onto its back , the otter then places the stone on its chest or tummy . 

  Holding the mussel with both forefeet , it begins pounding it on the rock until it is sufficiently broken to allow the otter to extract the flesh with its teeth . 

  As well as feeding on mussels , sea otters also take abalones . 

  This has brought them into conflict with the fishing industry as the harvesting of abalone is commercially important . 

  Since the abalone is rather like a large snail in having a protruding " foot " , it does not need to be opened in the same way as a mussel for the otter to eat it . 

  However , the way in which otters detached abalones from the seabed was , for a long time , a topic of much speculation . 

  Early observers who saw otters surfacing with abalones noticed that the abalone shells were often damaged , suggesting that they might have been removed by force . 

  Eventually divers provided first hand evidence that sea otters use rocks as hammers under water to dislodge the abalones . 

  The sea otter's ability to carry , hold and manipulate stone tools is closely linked with two special adaptations . 

  One is the ability to retract the claws on its front feet , making it much easier for the animal to manipulate objects in its " hands " . 

  The other is the possession of a flap of loose skin between each forelimb and the chest . 

  These unique pouch-like structures undoubtedly help the sea otter to carry food and rocks from the seabed to the surface . 

  The use of tools among primates , the apes and monkeys , is widespread . 

  This is probably due in part to the fact that so many people have gone looking for it . 

  Primate tool use has been studied by anthropologists in the hope that it might tell us something about our own evolution ; by psychologists trying to obtain a better understanding of problem solving and intelligence ; and by animal behaviourists simply because the use of tools among wild primates is part of their natural repertoire of behaviour . 

  In the academic literature about tool using , the primates definitely lead the field . 

  Apart from this , however , there is no doubt that primates are very well adapted for tool using because their hands are so well " designed " for grasping objects . 

  Like our own hands , those of most primates allow them to manipulate objects with a high degree of precision . 

  They have the vital factor of the opposable thumb , without which it would be impossible to handle and investigate objects with any degree of manual dexterity . 

  Because of this great advantage , the range of tool use among primates is , as we might expect , impressive . 

  Primates use tools in many of the same ways as other mammals -- although they probably use them better . 

  Many monkeys , for example , use branches , stones or even their own droppings as missiles directed at actual or potential predators . 

  The apes -- chimpanzees , gorillas and orang utans -- are better adapted for throwing things than monkeys since the structure of their shoulders , combined with their upright posture , allows them to throw with considerable force . 

  Monkeys also use sticks to reach food that may otherwise be out of reach , and they can use stones to help them open fruit and nuts . 

  An amusing example of defensive tool use was provided by a Barbary macaque of North Africa and Gibraltar who , on being chased , climbed onto a roof and hurled tiles at his human pursuers . 

  The long parent/ offspring association gives the young macaques plenty of time to learn from their elders . 

  The macaques' delicate hands look remarkably human and are well adapted for grasping and holding objects . 

  Apes and monkeys , like humans , have an opposable thumb which enables them to handle and investigate objects . 

  However , humans are distinguished from all other primates by their precision grip which enables them to manipulate objects with much greater control and accuracy . 

  Baby chimpanzees soon learn to use their hands and feet to manipulate things to their advantage . 

  What puts primate tool use into a class of its own , however , is that it does , in many cases , indicate intelligence . 

  Perhaps one of the most remarkable uses of tools either of us has ever witnessed was the result of a remarkable piece of thinking -- we use the word deliberately -- by a Japanese macaque . 

  An experiment was carried out with a mixed age group of macaques . 

  A long plastic tube containing a tasty morsel of food in the middle was placed in their cage . 

  The tube was more than twice the length of an adult macaque's arms . 

  The monkeys were left to try to extract the food for themselves . 

  After studying the situation for a few minutes the first macaque ran off and got a long stick . 

  Within seconds it had managed to work some of the food to within an arm's length of the tube entrance . 

  It then grabbed the food and quickly ate it before any of the others could steal it . 

  But nearby there was a very large adult macaque who had worked out an even better solution . 

  The adult seized a very small baby macaque , which could actually fit inside the tube . 

  It then pushed the baby up the tube , keeping a firm grip of its leg . 

  Once the youngster had grabbed what food remained , the adult pulled it out of the tube and took the food from it . 

  This same species of macaque has also been seen to wash rice and potatoes , provided by biologists , in the sea before eating them . 

  Such behaviour not only cleaned any dirt off the food but also coated it in salt which may have added to its flavour . 

  The champion tool user in the animal kingdom , however , is the chimpanzee . 

  Chimpanzees use tools more often and in a greater variety of ways than any other animal , except man . 

  Much of what we now know about the tool-using behaviour of wild chimpanzees has come from the remarkable long-term studies carried out at the Gombe Stream Reserve in Tanzania by British primatologist Jane Goodall . 

  Chimpanzees have been seen to use sticks to help them dig for roots , and as levers to break open ants' nests . 

  They also use sticks or grass stems to probe for food , and in particular they use them to " fish " for giant termites . 

  The soldiers in a termite colony respond aggressively to anything other than their own colony members entering the nest , so when a chimpanzee pushes a grass stem into the nest , they bite it . 

  The chimpanzee extracts the stem with the termites conveniently attached by their jaws , and then pulls it either through its mouth or hand to remove them . 

  Termite fishing is not as simple or straightforward as it sounds . 

  It obviously requires a considerable degree of skill , not only in placing the tool into the nest and extracting the termites , but also in terms of selecting or constructing an appropriate tool . 

  Stems for fishing are usually selected from nearby vegetation ; they are generally about 1 cm ( &amp;amp;l/ 2 in ) across and 65 cm ( 26 in ) long . 

  Chimpanzees younger than two years old do not attempt to fish although they do watch their mother doing it . 

  By the time they are three years old , young chimps are attempting it themselves , but at this age they are still very inefficient , often using tools of the wrong size . 

  However , a further year of practice and they are nearly as proficient as the adults . 

  As well as catching termites in this way chimpanzees have also been seen " fishing " in the nests of bees to extract honey . 

  Chimpanzees also use leaves as tools , either as a sponge to collect water or , as an aid to personal hygiene , to wipe sticky substances such as fruit juice from their bodies . 

  The orang utan , the red ape found in the rain forests of Borneo and Sumatra , shares some of the chimpanzee's tool-using abilities . 

  It uses sticks to move objects , including food , and to probe for termites , and it uses leaves in the same way as the chimpanzee -- it even uses a large leaf as an umbrella during rain . 

  It does , however , spend more time than chimpanzees in trees , from which it occasionally drops branches onto predators . 

  This orang utan demonstrates its ability to grasp efficiently with both hands and feet -- a useful trick as it spends most of its life in the trees . 

  This means it could hold on with a couple of limbs whilst feeding with the others . 

  Alone among the great apes , the gorilla seems to have a rather limited tool-using repertoire . 

  In the wild , it confines itself mainly to unaimed throwing and the brandishing of sticks . 

  Much of the fascination with tool use among animals stems from its apparent similarity to human use of tools . 

  Because we think it so characteristic of human activity , we tend to assume that tool-using behaviour must demand special , exceptional intellectual skills . 

  It was once thought that tool users might have a more complex and sophisticated nervous system than other animals , and that by studying them we might find out something of significance about the human race itself . 

  Tool using was thought to be the " key " to understanding ourselves . 

  It is now apparent that too much weight has been attached to tool using . 

  To the animals that do it , there is nothing particularly special about using tools : it is a piece of behaviour much like any other that the animal performs . 

  In some cases , such as the crab Melia and the sand wasps , tool use is innate , while in others , such as the green herons' bait fishing , it is largely learned . 

  But whatever the case , tool use is only one of the many varied and complex behavioural adaptations that animals have acquired in their struggle to survive . 

  Nevertheless , the topic remains a fascinating one : the magic of seeing animals like Melia , as it waves its two fearsome anemones at a predator , is not to be denied . 

  HERMIT CRABS 

  The 800 species of hermit crab that occur in the world's oceans are distinguished from all other crabs by living inside the unoccupied shells of marine snails . 

  These shells provide a home for the crabs and protect them from predators and the elements . 

  Different sized crabs utilise different sized shells , and as a crab grows it must change shells regularly to accommodate its larger body . 

  Hermit crabs must occupy shells of the right general size if they are to survive and breed . 

  Several studies have shown that crabs in shells which were too small for them were much more likely to be eaten by predators . 

  In some areas the size of the shell is less important than the thickness of the shell . 

  Other crabs and certain fish specialise in crushing mollusc shells , and where these predators exist , hermit crabs with the thickest shells are likely to be the safest . 

  Hermit crabs are able to make a rapid assessment of whether a particular shell is of an appropriate size or not , and how they do this has been the subject of much study . 

  It appears that they use a variety of factors . 

  The internal volume of the shell , shell weight , and aperture size are all important . 

  Crabs that live in areas where empty shells are scarce select relatively large shells when given a free choice , compared with crabs living where there is an abundance of empty shells . 

  Crabs that are short of shells presumably allow themselves room for growth . 

  Suitably sized shells are often in short supply and in some areas this limits the hermit crab population . 

  In one study in North America 12,000 empty shells were added to a small reef , resulting in a substantial increase in the crab population . 

  Where empty shells are difficult to find , hermit crabs often have to compete for them . 

  Interestingly , this competition is highly ritualised . 

  When two crabs meet in a rock pool , one of them grasps the other and " raps " vigorously and noisily at the other's shell . 

  Then , as though at some pre-arranged signal , both crabs wriggle free from their homes and exchange shells . 

  Although aggression under these circumstances is ritualised and hence harmless , the situation is rather different if one of the crabs has no shell . 

  When this happens the naked crab can sometimes evict the other by direct aggression . 

  An enforced exchange of shells was observed . 

  In this case , there was an encounter between two individuals , one of which was sporting a rather battered shell . 

  This particular crab grabbed the other individual and forced it out of its shell . 

  The " naked " crab moved about 60 cm ( 2 ft ) away while the first crab nipped out of its damaged shell and took up residence in the new one . 

  The other crab , rather than being left homeless and therefore extremely vulnerable to predators , instantly jumped into the broken shell . 

  Clearly a damaged shell is better than no shell at all . 

  ANTING 

  Most ants secrete noxious substances as a means of defence . 

  Some squirt formic acid , while others exude foul-smelling substances from their anal glands . 

  You only need to stir up the nest of a wood ant with a stick ( not with your hand ) to be able to smell them . 

  Over 200 species of birds have been seen anointing themselves with these substances . 

  The process involves using the ants as tools , and is achieved in one of two ways . 

  The bird picks up one or several ants in its bill and presses them against its feathers . 

  While doing this the bird usually adopts a particular posture , with wing and tail spread , allowing access to the base of its feathers . 

  The fluids from the ants are actually mixed with saliva and spread with a stroking movement onto the feathers . 

  This is referred to as direct anting . 

  The other method , indirect anting , is less common . 

  The bird simply sits on top of an ants' nest and allows the ants to climb all over it , squirting their defensive fluids as they do so . 

  The bird adopts a characteristic squatting posture with its wings thrust forward to allow the ants access to the important feather tracts . 

  Every so often the bird readjusts its position by shuffling its wings or tail , stirring up the ants as it does so . 

  A starling anointing itself with the defensive fluids of an ant . 

  The most likely explanation of anting is that it helps birds like the European jay to keep their feathers in good condition . 

  The ants' fluids may act as insecticides and keep ectoparasites , such as feather lice , at bay . 

  An alternative suggestion is that the substances produced by ants might supplement the birds' preen oil in some way . 

  BIGAMY BIRDS 

  A charming woodland scene : a male pied flycatcher , in his sparkling black and white summer plumage , singing his simple but pleasant song , has attracted a female to his nest site . 

  She is building the nest while he jealously guards her against the attentions of other males . 

  Soon , the female will begin to lay her eggs . 

  The atmosphere is one of happy domesticity . 

  This does not last long . 

  As soon as the female begins to lay , the male leaves her ; he returns to another part of the wood where another female -- his first mate -- is about to hatch her eggs , and takes up his parental duties . 

  The abandoned female is often left to rear her family on her own . 

  The male pied flycatcher ( as the chapter title suggests ) is a bigamist . 

  There is nothing so unusual about this . 

  Although the great majority of birds are monogamous , there are plenty of species -- particularly among the grouse , sandpipers , manakins , birds of paradise and cotingas -- where it is common for males to have two or even more mates . 

  What is different about the pied flycatcher , and what makes this species so interesting , is that the male achieves his bigamy by deceit . 

  The pied flycatcher is a summer visitor to Europe , having spent the winter months in Africa . 

  The first birds , usually males , arrive in southern Britain in the second half of April , arriving a little later further north . 

  Pied flycatchers breed primarily in broad-leafed woodland which provides the insect food , mainly caterpillars , they require to feed their young . 

  In northern Europe pied flycatchers also breed in coniferous forests , but usually in fairly low numbers . 

  Holes in trees provide nest sites , but pied flycatchers will also use nest boxes . 

  It is because they take to these artificial sites so readily that pied flycatchers have been studied in such detail : breeding in a nest box allows nests to be checked and the adults to be caught and ringed much more easily than if they were in natural cavities . 

  Pied flycatcher populations are often limited by the number of nesting sites available . 

  Holes in trees are often scarce and the problem is made more acute by competition from other hole nesters like the great tit , redstart and nuthatch . 

  The effect of simply providing nest boxes can be dramatic . 

  In 1983 , in one Welsh woodland where there were no nest boxes , three pairs of pied flycatchers nested . 

  In the following year , 100 nest boxes were put up in the wood , with the result that , in 1985 , no less than 60 pairs bred . 

  The extra pairs had been there all the time ; they had simply found nowhere to nest before . 

  In some parts of Britain the breeding population of pied flycatchers can reach 120 pairs per sq km and in central Sweden as many as 200 pairs per sq km have been recorded . 

  The distinctive black and white summer plumage of the male pied flycatcher . 

  By August the male will have begun to moult and will become almost indistinguishable from the female . 

  The pied flycatcher's return to Europe is timed so that breeding coincides with the flush of spring insects , particularly caterpillars . 

  It must time the laying of its eggs so that its chicks hatch when caterpillars are most abundant , and most palatable . 

  Most pairs in Britain lay in the middle two weeks of May , with the eggs hatching 12 or 13 days later . 

  The bulk of the chicks' diet consists of leaf-eating caterpillars from oak trees , particularly those of the green oak tortrix , and these are at their best in the few weeks after the leaf buds come out . 

  Defoliating caterpillars can cause severe damage to oak trees -- indeed , trees sometimes have to put out a new set of leaves later in the summer . 

  In an attempt to deter the caterpillars , the oaks produce distasteful chemicals called tannins in their leaves which make them less palatable . 

  However , the tannins are least abundant in the younger leaves . 

  Natural selection obviously favours the most successful caterpillars , and these are the ones that hatch out early enough to get their jaws into the young , tender , comparatively tannin-free leaves . 

  One result of this is that the pied flycatcher must be quick off the mark early in the season in order to get the most nutritious caterpillars . 

  Those caterpillars that feed on older leaves , with a high tannin content , are less nutritious for the chicks . 

  The tannins affect the absorption by the birds' guts of certain essential nutrients causing low growth rates which are sometimes fatal . 

  A key adaptation in pied flycatchers , therefore , is the timing of their breeding season . 

  If they start too early there are not enough caterpillars to go round , but if they start too late the caterpillars can be toxic . 

  A female pied flycatcher . 

  This species is as much at home in an artificial nest box as its normal nest site -- a hole in a tree . 

  On their arrival at the breeding grounds , male pied flycatchers find a suitable nesting site . 

  Unlike many other small birds , they do not defend a large territory , but simply defend an area around the nest hole . 

  This behaviour , as we will see , plays an important role in the pied flycatcher's bigamous life . 

  By means of his smart plumage and his simple song , the male tries to attract a female to his nest site . 

  Once he has succeeded , the female enters the nest site and starts to build the nest . 

  This , his first mate , is known as the primary female . 

  The interval between initial pairing and the laying of the first egg is about nine days . 

  During this time the nest is completed and the pair mate . 

  Once egg laying has started , no further copulations take place . 

  In the days preceding laying , when the female can be fertilised , the male remains close to his partner , guarding her from other males' attempts to mate surreptitiously . 

  The primary female lays a clutch of about seven eggs on average , laying one egg each day , generally in the morning . 

  The number of eggs a female lays , however , largely depends upon when she starts . 

  The earliest breeding females lay the largest clutches and produce the most young , usually six or seven chicks . 

  The last females to breed lay about six eggs but rear only four young . 

  This seasonal decline in reproductive success is yet another factor in the pied flycatcher's bigamous mating system . 

  As soon as the female has laid her first egg , the male leaves her . 

  He flies to some distant part of the forest -- usually 150 m ( nearly 200 yards ) , but sometimes as far as 3.5 km ( over 2 miles ) , away . 

  He finds another nest site and starts the whole procedure all over again . 

  With luck , he succeeds in attracting and forming a bond with a second female . 

  However , as soon as this female lays her eggs the male deserts her , leaving her to rear this brood by herself . 

  He then returns to his first mate , the primary female , whose eggs are by now just hatching , and helps her raise this brood . 

  The mating behaviour of pied flycatchers is immensely complicated and scientists studying them interpret their behaviour slightly differently . 

  This strange kind of polygyny has accounted for at least nine different hypotheses attempting to explain the birds' bizarre mating system . 

  Although the pied flycatcher's adultery has been known about since 1950 , it is only in the last few years that the scientist Rauno Alatalo and his colleagues , studying pied flycatchers in Sweden , have begun to unravel the finer details . 

  The observations reported below are based on the results of his studies . 

  The male deceives the second female by appearing to be unpaired . 

  She pairs with him assuming that he will help her rear the young . 

  The male pied flycatcher does nicely out of this arrangement : he fathers two broods , but normally helps to rear just one of them . 

  On average , bigamous male pied flycatchers produce eight or nine offspring in a season , whereas monogamous ones produce only five or six . 

  Females are less productive than this and secondary females do particularly badly out of the system . 

  Primary females usually raise five or six young , while secondary females raise only three or four . 

  Not only do secondary females produce smaller broods than primary females but , being alone , they also have to do twice as much work to rear their young , which saps their strength . 

  Males can afford to let their secondary female struggle on alone because a single bird can still rear some young . 

  The pied flycatcher's nest site , being a hole nest , provides protection from both predators and the weather , enabling the female to leave the young for short periods while she forages for food . 

  For the male pied flycatcher , bigamy is obviously a successful strategy , but it also requires quite complex behavioural adaptations . 

  One of the key things for the male is to time his departure from the first female correctly . 

  If he leaves her as soon as she has accepted him , he increases his chances of getting a second female , but by leaving her unguarded he risks being cuckolded by another male . 

  Males , therefore , generally wait until the female has started to lay her eggs before going off in search of a second mate , since females rarely mate again once laying has begun . 

  This seems to be the optimal solution for the male . 

  If he waited until his first female had completed laying , he would have missed opportunities for finding another female . 

  By leaving when he does , he still gives himself the chance of a second female but he minimises the risk of being cuckolded . 

  His strategy is the one most likely to guarantee the maximum number of his own offspring . 

  The question is : why do secondary females accept their status ? 

  The answer is that while they may not have the male's full attention they do often get a good territory with plenty of food . 

  Since breeding success declines through the season , females simply can not afford to waste time checking to see whether a particular male is paired or not . 

  Every day of delay reduces their chances of successful breeding still further . 

  Bigamous males simply exploit the fact that females are in a hurry . 

  By moving away from his first mate , the male prevents the female from assessing his true status until it is too late for her to do anything about it . 

  Secondary females typically lay fewer eggs than either primary females or monogamously mated ones . 

  This suggests that secondary females are somehow able to recognise the fact that they are not going to get any help from the male . 

  Secondary females adjust their clutch size so that they will be better able to rear the brood . 

  It will be in the female's best interests to lay just four eggs and rear all the young than to lay seven eggs and produce a brood of weaklings . 

  This is better for the male , too , and he may actually inform the female in some way that she is a secondary female , but as yet we do not know how . 

  Bigamous males are usually larger than monogamous males . 

  They may also be older and more experienced , and arrive on the breeding grounds earlier in the spring . 

  Although all males try to get a second female , only about 15 per cent are successful . 

  ( This percentage can vary from year to year and fluctuates from 5-30 per cent . ) 

  Their success hinges on deceiving the female and , since this is achieved by having a separate territory for each female , it is easy to see how larger and more experienced birds might have the advantage . 

  A few other bird species also show this type of deceptive behaviour . 

  These include the great reed warbler , the wheatear , the whitethroat and the redstart but , as yet , none of these is as well studied as the pied flycatcher . 

  The male pied flycatcher is unusual in using deception to achieve his ends . 

  He is far from alone in having more than one mate . 

  Polygamy , the general term for this behaviour , is widespread in the bird world , and takes a bewildering variety of forms . 

  It is quite common for male birds to mate with several females ( technically known as polygyny , meaning many females ) . 

  It is rather less common for females to mate with more than one male ( polyandry , meaning many males ) . 

  And there are even species which do both ( known as polygynandry ) . 

  The brilliant epaulettes of the male red-winged blackbird may be a help in attracting a large number of females to his territory . 

  The commonest form of polygyny occurs in species where the male obtains a territory and then attracts as many females to it as possible . 

  The North American red-winged blackbird is a good example . 

  The male of this starling-like bird is black with brilliant orange and red epaulettes . 

  Red-wings breed in marshy areas throughout the United States and much of Canada . 

  Males arrive on the breeding grounds a day or two ahead of the females and set up territories . 

  Once the females arrive , the male displays frantically in an attempt to persuade them that his own particular territory will be the best place to breed . 

  The male's display involves a distinctive song and the flashing of his red wing patches . 

  For some males this works well and they end up with as many as ten females on their territory . 

  Others are less successful and may get only a single female or even remain unmated . 

  There are some puzzling aspects to this . 

  Why should a female want to pair up with a male that already has several females when there are bachelors around ? 

  A female that pairs monogamously with a male will get some help from him with rearing the chicks . 

  A female that moves in with an already paired male must share him with the other females . 

  The females are obviously well aware of this , as they try hard to dissuade other females from joining their chosen male . 

  Nonetheless , some males seem to be irresistible and end up as harem holders . 

  The reason for this appears to be that the territories occupied by red-winged blackbirds in these marshes vary enormously in their quality , specifically in the amount of food they contain . 

  Females first check out the males and their territories , and only pair with those in good territories . 

  In some cases the territory is so good it does not matter that a female has to share it with other females . 

  The male red-wings do quite well out of this arrangement since they father most of their female's offspring -- most , not all , since the male can not keep his eye on all his females simultaneously and some will happily mate with males in the territories next door . 

  The American lark bunting has a similar breeding system , but males mate with a maximum of two females . 

  Lark buntings inhabit the prairies , breeding in alfalfa fields . 

  Midday temperatures can be high and the major causes of chick mortality are sunstroke and overheating . 

  Females prefer to mate with males whose territory contains a shady place to build the nest and rear the young . 

  Males with little or no shade in their territory often remain unpaired . 

  When biologists studying these birds added extra shade to some territories , the birds exhibited something that had not been seen in this species before ; trigamy , males with three mates . 

  The male red-winged blackbird attempts to attract as many females like this one , as possible to nest in his territory and , although the female would prefer his sole attention , she will share him with several other females if the territory is good enough . 

  In some birds , females are attracted not by the quality of a male's territory , but by the male himself . 

  The males of these species display in groups in order to attract females . 

  The display ground is referred to as a lek , which , depending on the species , may be located in the centre of a large open meadow or deep in a tropical rain forest . 

  The one thing all lekking species have in common is that , apart from mating with the female , the male bird plays no part whatsoever in raising the young . 

  Leks provide some of the world's most wonderful and memorable bird displays . 

  Male blue-backed manakins of South America display in pairs , performing highly ritualised and marvellously synchronised displays . 

  To attract a female , the two males sit side by side and call . 

  Although both males call , they do so in such close unison that it sounds like a single call . 

  Detailed analysis shows that the dominant member of the pair starts the calling , but the other male joins in just of a second later . 

  When a female appears the two males start to perform the " catherine wheel " display . 

  The catherine Wheel display of blue-backed manakins . 

  The male nearest the female jumps into the air and , hovering , moves backwards . 

  His place is then immediately taken by the other male . 

  The birds go round and round , going faster and faster , and making nasal " twanging " calls as they do so . 

  Eventually the dominant male gives a sharp cry and the subordinate flies off . 

  Left alone , the dominant male mates with the female who then goes off to lay two eggs and rear her young alone . 

  Male black grouse or blackcocks congregate at traditional lekking sites where they compete for the attentions of the females . 

  In Finland some of these sites are even found in the middle of frozen lakes . 

  The cock-of-the-rock belongs to a group of birds known as the cotingas , closely related to the manakins . 

  They too breed in the forests of Central and South America . 

  The male cock-of-the-rock is one of the world's most colourful birds , with its brilliant orange plumage , black wings and a centurion-like crest . 

  Males display in groups on the forest floor , clearing small areas -- their " courts " -- of all leaves and twigs . 

  The arrival of a female at the lek drives the males into a frenzy of display , with much showing off of their remarkable crests . 

  Females visit the lek only to mate , and they appear to be very particular about whom they choose . 

  Some males are obviously more attractive to females than others and get the lion's share of the matings . 

  The less attractive males , however , do not just sit on the sidelines . 

  Often they will fly onto their rival's court just as he is mating , and disrupt the copulation . 

  Observations of individually marked birds have shown that this disruptive behaviour is adaptive . 

  Disruptive males cause the females to leave the lek temporarily ; when they return , the likelihood that they will mate with such males is increased . 

  A sage grouse in full mating display will compete for the attentions of females on the lek . 

  There are also lekking birds in the temperate regions of Europe and North America . 

  They include the sage grouse of North America , and the black grouse , ruff and great snipe of northern Europe . 

  In all these species the males compete for dominance on the lek , and the females mate mainly with the most dominant males . 

  On a typical sage grouse lek , just 10 per cent of the males get over 75 per cent of all matings . 

  In other words , some males are extraordinarily successful while others may never mate . 

  This pattern is common to all lek species that have been studied . 

  It results in intense competition between the males , and this may be one reason why the males of lekking birds are larger and much more brilliantly coloured than the females . 

  A male long-tailed widow bird floats across his territory displaying his enormous tail . 

  Experiments have shown that female long-tailed widow birds prefer males with the longest tails . 

  Quite why females should be so impressed by plumes , iridescent colours and whirling displays is an interesting question . 

  It may be that these serve in some way as an indication of the quality of the male to the female . 

  This idea has not been studied in detail in any lek species to date . 

  However , some interesting experiments have been carried out with another polygamous bird , the long-tailed widow bird . 

  This is a 7 cm ( 3 in ) long member of the weaver bird family , the male of which bears a 50 cm ( 20 in ) long tail . 

  Widow birds live in Africa and , as in red-winged blackbirds , males try to attract as many females to their territory as possible . 

  They do this by means of a beautiful display in which they appear to float across their territory showing off their enormous tails . 

  A Swedish researcher , Malte Andersson , performed an ingenious experiment to see whether the male's tail had evolved because females showed a sexual preference for long-tailed males . 

  He caught males and either shortened or lengthened their tails . 

  The results showed that those males with experimentally elongated tails subsequently attracted more females than those with reduced tails . 

  The females clearly preferred the males with the longest tails . 

  This study demonstrates that females do differentiate between males on the basis of their sexual ornaments . 

  It is not entirely clear what females gain from this choice , but there are several ideas . 

  One is that a long tail indicates an extremely fit male : to grow such a tail and carry it around will take extra energy . 

  Therefore by choosing a long-tailed male the female will have her eggs fathered by a strong male and such beneficial characteristics will be inherited by her sons . 

  A second possibility is that the male's spectacular plumage indicates that he is free of parasites , otherwise he could not have grown such superb feathers . 

  More research will have to be completed before we can determine precisely what excites female widow-birds . 

  Opposite The resplendent tail of the male peacock has always intrigued evolutionary biologists and dazzled peahens . 

  The enormous handicap such a tail gives a male may in itself be what attracts the female to the male . 

  It may make the statement : " I have survived despite having such a cumbersome tail so mate with me and your offspring will be as successful as me . " 

  In some polygynous species it is not the male's plumage that attracts the female , but specially constructed artefacts -- bowers . 

  The 18 species of bowerbird inhabit the damp forests of New Guinea and Australia . 

  In one group of bowerbirds , the males are brightly coloured and build only modest bowers . 

  In the other species , however , unlike their relatives , the birds of paradise , the sexes differ hardly at all and the males build some of the most extraordinary structures in the animal kingdom . 

  The more complex the bower , it seems , the less elaborate the bird . 

  The gardener bowerbird , for example , constructs the most remarkably complicated , hut-like bower , while the golden bowerbird builds a maypole bower up to 3 m ( 10 ft ) high , gluing the sticks together with fungus and then decorating the whole structure with fruit , flowers and moss . 

  Some species , like the satin bowerbird , construct avenue-shaped bowers , which are decorated with all sorts of items -- snail shells , flowers , pebbles and an array of bits and pieces . 

  The bower is not a nest : its function is purely to attract the female . 

  When a female approaches the bower , the male starts to display . 

  Providing she is sufficiently impressed , she will mate with him inside the bower . 

  The quality of the bower and its decoration play a key role in its effect on the female . 

  As a result , males attempt to destroy each other's bowers , and steal each other's decorations . 

  But , just as in lekking species , the males that put on the most impressive displays are the most successful in attracting females , while others with less appealing bowers may fail to mate at all . 

  MacGregor's bowerbird builds a complex bower of the " maypole " type . 

  The bower is decorated with a variety of mosses , ferns and human artefacts . 

  Then the male performs in his arena -- mating with as many females as he can attract . 

  It used to be thought that a species was either monogamous or polygamous and that , in this respect at least , its behaviour was fixed . 

  We now know that this is not true : in some species the mating system is quite flexible and changes according to ecological circumstances . 

  The best known case occurs in one of Europe's most nondescript little birds , the dunnock . 

  This sparrow-sized bird is dull brown and grey in colour , and since it spends much of its time scurrying around on the ground , it often looks more like a mouse than a bird . 

  Despite being one of the commonest and most widespread birds in Britain , until recently it had not been studied in detail . 

  The inconspicuous dunnock has the most variable mating system of any known bird . 

  Our own interest in dunnocks was aroused several years ago by a chance comment , made over a cup of coffee . 

  We were discussing dunnocks with a well known ornithologist when he told us that , as a schoolboy , he had colour-ringed the dunnocks in his garden and was surprised to find three different adults feeding a single clutch of young . 

  This sounded interesting , so , working in a large garden in Scotland , we started to examine the mating system and social organisation of dunnocks for ourselves . 

  We were indeed able to confirm that pairs of dunnocks were often joined by a third bird in breeding , but this provided a mere foretaste of what was to come . 

  It was not until Nick Davies , a researcher from Cambridge University , had studied dunnocks for several years that the awesome complexity of their love lives became apparent . 

  Dunnocks , it emerged , have the most variable mating system of any known bird . 

  At one extreme some males simply remain unpaired because they can not attract a female . 

  Sometimes three males may share one female ( polyandry ) but two males sharing one female is the commonest situation . 

  The next commonest is monogamy -- one male paired with one female . 

  But then things become rather chaotic . 

  Up to three males may share two females , or two males may share three females . 

  The commonest situation here is for two males to share two females . 

  The final combination in this eccentric set-up is one male with two females ( polygyny ) . 

  What makes it all the more remarkable is that , unlike other group-living birds , the individuals involved in these mating combinations are not close relatives . 

  The range of mating systems shown by the dunnock probably reflects the differences in the interests of males and females . 

  It is in the interests of both sexes to maximise the amount of contact with the opposite sex . 

  Females benefit from having several male partners because they all help to rear her young . 

  A male benefits from having a number of females because he fathers all their chicks . 

  Consequently , at one extreme , where one female has several males , she has " won " . 

  At the other extreme , where a single male mates with several females , he has " won " . 

  The combinations in between are those cases where neither sex has clearly won , but neither do that badly . 

  It is worth looking in more detail at one of the intermediate situations in this conflict between the sexes . 

  The commonest of these is the one in which two males share one female . 

  Each male " wants " to be the sole father of the young , but the female " wants " both of them to help rear her offspring . 

  The dunnock has a most unusual pre-copulatory display . 

  The male places himself behind the female and pecks at her cloaca . 

  Such behaviour may make the female deposit a drop of fluid which sometimes contains sperm from previous matings . 

  As a result one male , the dominant of the two , does his very best to keep the subordinate from mating , while the female does her best to get both males to mate with her . 

  The reason for this is simple . 

  If both mate with her , they both help to rear the young , but if the subordinate does not mate , he does not help the female . 

  There is a further twist in the sexual politics of the dunnock . 

  Before mating , the birds perform a display which is unique in the animal kingdom . 

  The male pecks at the female's cloaca , or reproductive opening , and the female responds by ejecting a tiny droplet of fluid . 

  On examination , it turns out that this fluid contains millions of sperm . 

  By ejecting the sperm from previous matings , the female may convince the male that her offspring will also be his , and so enlist his aid in rearing them . 

  This probably explains why male dunnocks copulate with such extraordinary frequency -- about ten times a day . 

  Effectively , they are competing to be last . 

  The more often they mate , the more likely they are to be the one who fertilises the eggs , and the more certain they can be that the offspring they expend so much time and energy in rearing are theirs . 

  Successful reproduction is obviously the prime objective of a bird's -- indeed any animal's -- life . 

  But within this broad objective are a host of individual interests . 

  Males compete with other males for the attentions of females ; females then choose the most suitable males . 

  Males guard their females against the attentions of other males ; females attempt to prevent their males from straying in their affections . 

  Within the bird world as a whole , these conflicting interests are resolved in a huge variety of ways , from the steadfast monogamy of the majority of birds to the bewildering polygamy of the dunnock , and from the resplendent tail feathers of the male widow-bird to the male pied flycatcher's deceit . 

  SNEAKY MATINGS IN THE ZEBRA FINCH 

  The zebra finch is a small , colonial Australian finch , inhabiting all the drier parts of the country . 

  It is a remarkable little bird in many respects , being superbly adapted to the unpredictability of a semi-desert environment . 

  It can go without water for as long as 18 months , and is capable of breeding at just three months old if conditions are suitable . 

  Zebra finches are basically monogamous , with the male and female working together at all stages of the breeding cycle . 

  However , males are sexual opportunists and if they come across another male's female they will try to mate with her . 

  At the same time they try to make sure that no other males get the opportunity to mate with their own female . 

  They do this by guarding the female , staying close to her during the ten days or so when she is fertile . 

  This is not easy , however , because the male has to build the nest and guard his partner at the same time . 

  The female sits inside the nest while the male goes off collecting nest material . 

  He tries to confine his searching to the area around the nest , presumably so that he can keep an eye on his partner . 

  If she leaves the nest to go and feed he always follows her , and his presence is usually sufficient to deter other males . 

  Despite his precautions , he sometimes loses track of her and she is left unattended . 

  When this happens , the male flies around looking for her , calling frantically . 

  Other males appear to be able to tell when females are near to laying , and try their best to seduce them using prolonged bouts of song and courtship display : sometimes they succeed and the female allows a strange male to mate with her . 

  Males have an even more direct way of achieving a " sneaky " mating . 

  When a pair of zebra finches are courting , they try to do so away from other colony members , and with good reason . 

  Some males hang around the mating areas waiting for courting couples . 

  Just as a male is about to mate with his partner , the bystanding male swoops in to take the other's place . 

  Detailed studies of zebra finches , both in the wild and in captivity , have shown that sneaky mating outside the pair bond can be successful in fertilising eggs . 

  In general , though , it is the last male to mate that fathers most offspring . 

  It is probably for this reason that male zebra finches copulate frequently with their partners , even though a single mating is quite sufficient to fertilise all the eggs . 

  Zebra finches are always on the lookout for sex outside their " marriage " . 

  DELAYED FERTILISATION 

  There is one simple , physiological reason why male birds try so hard to mate with other males' mates , and why some females let them . 

  This is the fact that most , if not all , female birds store sperm after mating , before using it to fertilise their eggs . 

  Following mating , the sperm are stored in special tiny tubules in the female's reproductive tract . 

  They may be retained there for days or weeks before swimming up to the top of the tract and fertilising an egg . 

  The record , at present , lies with the turkey : some females have been reported laying fertile eggs ten weeks after their last mating . 

  In other birds sperm can be stored for shorter periods : average values are about six days in quail and doves and about ten days in chickens , ducks and zebra finches . 

  Compare this with most mammals , in which mating is timed to coincide much more precisely with the release of an ovum . 

  Indeed , in some species such as rabbits , the very act of mating induces the female to ovulate . 

  In most mammals sperm are viable in the female's reproductive tract for a matter of hours . 

  In humans the record is about seven days , but this is exceptional . 

  The male roadrunner of North America offers his mate a dead mouse as a precursor to mating . 

  Some species of birds mate frequently , others only once . 

  The female's ability to store sperm has important consequences for birds' mating behaviour . 

  It opens up the possibility for a male to come along and displace or remove the sperm stored from a previous mating . 

  The female's sperm storage tubules are sausage-shaped and sperm lie at the bottom of the tube . 

  Sperm from later matings overlie these , and are first out of the tubule when there is an egg to be fertilised : last in -- first out . 

  In other words the last male to mate usually has the best chance of fertilising the eggs . 

  In birds , therefore , the fact that a female has already mated does not mean that the paternity of her offspring is assured . 

  This is undoubtedly the reason why male birds often lead such frenetic sex lives . 

  They are competing vigorously with each other to be last . 

  FEMALES WITH MANY MATES 

  Equality of the sexes has yet to arrive in the world of birds . 

  The males of many species mate with several females , but females that mate with several males are rare . 

  There are good reasons why this mating system , referred to as polyandry ( literally , many males ) , is uncommon . 

  The number of offspring a male can produce depends on his ability to produce sperm and inseminate females . 

  Since sperm are manufactured by the million , the male's reproductive potential is really only limited by his access to females . 

  The more females he can fertilise , the more offspring he will have . 

  In contrast , a female's reproductive potential is limited by the number of eggs she can produce . 

  Unlike sperm , eggs are produced very sparingly . 

  So much energy is required for the formation of an egg that , in some species such as petrels , only a single egg can be laid in a season . 

  Clearly , the number of males a female mates with has little or no effect on the numbers of her offspring . 

  There might , however , be other advantages to polyandry . 

  If , by mating with more than one male , the female could persuade the males to help rear the young , then she would ensure a better chance of survival for her offspring than if she had only one helper or none at all . 

  This does appear to be what happens . 

  Fewer than 50 bird species are polyandrous . 

  These include jacanas , tinamous , phalaropes , some sandpipers and the dunnock . 

  In some birds , like the American jacana , the female defends a large " super-territory " within which each of her several males defends his territory . 

  Curiously , the female will help each male defend his territory from a neighbour , even though a few minutes later she may well move into the neighbour's territory and switch sides . 

  Female American jacanas may mate with up to four males at a time , sometimes within a few minutes , and then lay eggs in each male's nest . 

  The result of this is that males have no idea as to whether or not they are the father of the offspring they raise . 

  Nevertheless , there is still a sufficiently good chance that they are the father for them to undertake the major share of parental duties . 

  One consequence of this role reversal is that in jacanas , as in many polyandrous species , the male is smaller and more cryptically coloured than the females . 

  Since females compete for males , rather than vice versa , natural selection has favoured the females that are best at competing -- usually the bigger ones . 

  The present-day breeding habits of some birds give us a reasonably good idea of how polyandry evolved . 

  Female red-legged partridges and Temminck's stints produce two clutches in very rapid succession . 

  The male looks after the first and the female the second . 

  It is not too difficult to imagine how this could slip quietly into polyandry : females could develop the habit of mating with a second male and letting him care for her second clutch . 

  In fact something exactly like this occurs in the American spotted sandpiper . 

  The female mates with up to four males , laying a clutch of four eggs for each of them , but usually staying to help the last male . 

  Another form of polyandry is shown by the Galapagos hawk . 

  Here again , a female might be paired to four males , but in this case there is just one nest and all the males help the female . 

  However , the males compete vigorously for a share of paternity : if one male mates with the female the others all mate with her in rapid succession . 

  Female liberation is the norm amongst jacanas like this pheasant-tailed jacana . 

  One female mates with several males , leaving each to incubate a clutch of her eggs and raise the chicks . 

  THE SPADEFOOT TOAD 

  The Sonoran desert of Arizona is one of the least hospitable places on earth . 

  The soil is baked dry by the fierce heat of the sun ; there are no trees to provide shade . 

  There may be little rain for ten months of the year -- and in some years there may be no rain at all . 

  It is hard to believe that anything can survive in such a hostile environment . 

  Yet when the rains do finally arrive , the desert begins to stir . 

  From burrows deep beneath the surface of the desert soil , small creatures start to appear . 

  These are animals that would seem to have no chance of survival in the desert -- they are toads . 

  Toads are amphibians and , like the other amphibians -- frogs , newts and salamanders -- they depend entirely on water for their survival . 

  They can not breed without water , and their thin skins must be kept moist or they will dehydrate and die . 

  Anything less promising as a design for living in the desert is hard to imagine . 

  Nevertheless , one group of toads , the spadefoot toads , have adapted to life in some of the hottest and driest places in the world . 

  There are several species of spadefoot toad ; six can be found in North America , four in Europe , and several others in Asia . 

  But the best known are the Arizona desert dwellers -- the New Mexico spadefoot and Couch's spadefoot . 

  All spadefoot toads have adapted to arid environments , but it is these two species that are most finely tuned to the harsh extremes of life in the Sonoran desert . 

  The desert environment is characterised by very low and unpredictable rainfall . 

  When rain does occur , it is usually sudden , heavy and brief . 

  Since rainfall controls plant growth , and plants are the base of the food pyramid , deserts typically have only a short period when food is abundant ; it is during this time that the creatures of the desert must complete their breeding cycle . 

  Most deserts are also extremely hot . 

  In the Sonoran desert , average summer temperatures are around 40C , and maximum temperatures may exceed 55C . 

  These are shade temperatures and do not reflect the real intensity of the heat that an animal living there might experience . 

  Although air temperatures may be 40C , the surface of the sand could be as hot as 70C -- hot enough to fry an egg . 

  This spadefoot toad is at home in the dry desert lands of North America . 

  Animals and plants living in the desert therefore face severe problems . 

  They have had to adapt to high temperatures , shortage of water and a very brief time in which to reproduce . 

  The fact that the spadefoot toad has achieved this is all the more remarkable because it is an amphibian , and its need for water is so much greater than that of other land-based animals . 

  And the means by which it has done so provide another example of the fascination and complexity of adaptation in the natural world . 

  Sunrise in the Sonoran desert , Arizona . 

  Amphibians are particularly vulnerable to hot and dry conditions because their skins are so delicate and permeable to water . 

  Unprotected in the desert , they would lose so much water by evaporation that they would quickly die of desiccation . 

  Most desert animals reduce water loss by finding shade in some form or other . 

  In the case of the spadefoot , this means digging a burrow . 

  They are well adapted for the task . 

  All the spadefoots have a sharp-edged horny plate on the hind feet , the " spade " from which they get their name . 

  Using this " spade " , they simply dig down vertically until they are about 50 cm ( 20 in ) deep . 

  The burrow collapses around them so that they are effectively buried alive . 

  Within the burrow , the spadefoot achieves a high degree of protection from the relentless heat of the desert sand above . 

  During June in the dry season the temperature on the desert surface can exceed 60 SYM C , but 50 cm below the surface , where the spadefoot rests , the temperature is just 25 SYM C , and remains almost constant day and night . 

  Surprisingly , the burrow also provides the spadefoot with a source of water . 

  Deep underground , the spadefoot's thin skin comes into its own , enabling it to extract whatever moisture there is from the surrounding soil . 

  It does this through a special adaptation that allows it to adjust the concentration of its blood . 

  At high concentrations , the blood becomes a sort of chemical sponge , capable of drawing in whatever meagre supplies of water exist , even when the toad's body already contains much more water than the surrounding area of soil . 

  The thin permeable skin allows moisture to flow into the animal rather than out of it . 

  Even when the soil is virtually dry , spadefoot toads can remain underground for prolonged periods by maintaining their blood concentration at the correct level . 

  Unsurprisingly the nature of the soil can affect the toad's ability to retain water . 

  Clay soils , composed of very fine particles , have a much higher affinity for water than silty soils . 

  As a result it is much more difficult for toads to extract water from clay . 

  Buried beneath the desert soil in its underground burrow , a spadefoot toad shelters from the intense heat , waiting for the all-too-infrequent rains to come . 

  Despite these adaptations , when the surrounding soil dries out during the long dry season , the toads may still lose considerable amounts of body water . 

  However , the spadefoot's body tissues have the remarkable ability to withstand the loss of large amounts of water . 

  Couch's spadefoot can lose up to 60 per cent of its body water without suffering any long term effects . 

  When the time comes , it can recoup any water loss and rehydrate very rapidly , although not by drinking . 

  Water is absorbed directly through the skin -- no adult amphibians are known to drink . 

  Rehydration can occur within four hours if the spadefoot is in water , but it can also take place , albeit more slowly , if it simply sits in or on damp soil . 

  The skin of the toad's undersurface is specially adapted for this ; it is thin , smooth and richly endowed with blood vessels , which transport the water to the rest of the body through the bloodstream . 

  Several species of desert-living frogs and toads can withstand dehydration , but not to the same extent . 

  Even those mammals best adapted to desert conditions , such as the camel , can not begin to match this ability . 

  The spadefoot will spend months on end in its burrow , living off its fat supplies and conserving moisture . 

  Almost all its activity is restricted to the two months of the year when it rains . 

  The spadefoot has no fixed breeding season . 

  It simply breeds when conditions are suitable , that is , immediately after heavy rain . 

  If there is no rain there is no breeding . 

  In southern California , rainfall is so infrequent that Couch's spadefoot may breed only once in two years . 

  So until it rains , the spadefoot sits immobile in its burrow , an unsuspected living presence beneath the parched desert floor . 

  The sound of heavy rain drumming on the desert surface above is the signal for the spadefoot toads to begin to dig their way out of their burrows . 

  Even now , however , they may have to wait . 

  Despite the rain , daytime temperatures can still be lethal , so the spadefoot is strictly nocturnal , with relatively large eyes and cat-like vertical pupils . 

  But as soon as it is dusk , the soil becomes alive with toads frantically digging their way to the surface . 

  And within an hour or so there can be thousands of toads on the surface of the desert . 

  The events that follow are spectacular : they have been graphically described by A. N. Bragg in his book Gnomes of the Night : the Spadefoot Toads , ( Univ . 

  of Pennsylvania Press , 1965 ) : 

  Two and one half inches of rain had fallen in about two hours , the sky clearing just before sundown . 

  Air temperature was 15 SYM C at 8.00 pm , just before complete darkness , when I heard the first voices in an extensively flooded field . 

  At first I heard only a few calls ; within ten minutes , at least twice as many animals were calling , and , by circling about the pool , I observed that a steady stream of spadefoots was coming from all directions to the breeding area . 

  I caught and examined a good sample of these . 

  All were males of a single species , the Plains Spadefoot ( Scaphiopus bombifrons ) . 

  These males entered the pool as they reached it and were soon calling as lustily as those first there . 

  Within an hour hundreds of spadefoot males were bobbing like so many light balloons on the pool's surface , each every second or less giving voice to a single loud " Wah ! " . 

  The heavy desert rains soon produce shallow , temporary ponds . 

  These rapidly become the scenes of intense activity , not just of the spadefoot toads , but also of the other animals that are tuned to a similar life cycle . 

  A male Couch's spadefoot calls to attract a female to the pond . 

  Its distinctive call is said to sound like an unhappy goat . 

  Male spadefoots make their way to the ponds first and start to call . 

  The chorus produced by hundreds of males can be heard over a mile away . 

  This attracts females to the pond , but the calls also serve another purpose . 

  Several different species of toad may be present in the pond at the same time . 

  Each species has a distinctive call recognised only by others of the same species , which helps to prevent males mating with the wrong females . 

  Couch's spadefoot sounds like an unhappy goat . 

  The plains spadefoot's call resembles a duck's , while the New Mexico species makes a noise like a finger being rubbed over a balloon . 

  Because the pools are limited in number , and because rain has stimulated all toads in the area to breed at the same time , the breeding ponds become extremely crowded . 

  For the spadefoot , mating is an urgent business : they have not even stopped to feed , despite their months-long fast . 

  There is literally no time to waste . 

  The rains may disappear as suddenly as they arrived ; the pond may dry out within a few days , and so the whole cycle of breeding activity must be completed in the shortest possible time . 

  As a result , all spadefoot mating activity normally takes place on just one night . 

  Some males return to the ponds on subsequent nights , but because there are few females around , very little happens . 

  Opposite Even during the brief rains daytime temperatures can be lethal , so even now the spadefoot toad must wait for nightfall before emerging from its burrow . 

  Given the desperate urgency of the situation , and the fact that males usually outnumber females , it is not surprising that competition between males for females is intense . 

  For the male spadefoot toad , unlike the males of many other species , it is not a question of how many females he can mate with , but whether he can mate with any at all . 

  Just mating with a single female may be difficult enough and very few will have the opportunity to mate more than once a year . 

  Males are seemingly indiscriminate and grasp anything roughly the right size , including other males . 

  Before they copulate , frogs and toads pair up in a " pre-mating " embrace known as amplexus . 

  The way in which the male holds the female in amplexus differs between species , but the spadefoot male holds his female around her waist . 

  Pairs of toads in amplexus are easily caught and the sizes of male and female can be recorded and compared with sizes of unpaired individuals ( most often just males ) in the pond . 

  Studies of amorous amphibians have revealed two different mating patterns . 

  In the first , only the largest males obtain a female . 

  In the second , male and female are matched for size , so large males form amplexus with large females , and small males with small females . 

  The first pattern , demonstrated by tree frogs , for example , could arise because large males displace smaller ones from females , or because females prefer larger males . 

  In the second pattern , where pairs in amplexus are matched for size , the males may be better able to resist displacement by other males . 

  Thus , as far as the spadefoot is concerned , it is quite possible that what appears at first sight to be a random collection of toads arbitrarily mating with anything and everything is actually an ordered process . 

  Frogs and toads engage in amplexus for several reasons . 

  Since fertilisation is external , with the male's sperm being shed over the eggs as they are laid , amplexus ensures that the male is in the right place at the right time to fertilise the eggs . 

  In addition , amplexus allows a male to guard a female from other males until she is ready to lay her eggs . 

  In the spadefoot , the intense competition among males for females means that some over-anxious males do not wait for the females to get into the pond but instead waylay them on the way to the breeding ground ; the pair then arrive at the pond already in amplexus . 

  Within an hour or so of reaching the pond and becoming clasped in amplexus , females start to lay their eggs . 

  As they do so the male arches his back and draws his sexual opening adjacent to that of the female . 

  His sperm then covers the eggs as they are laid and fertilisation occurs within 10 to 15 minutes . 

  The eggs are surrounded by a coating of jelly-like mucus which , when first laid , is very thin , allowing the male's sperm to penetrate . 

  This mucus capsule swells rapidly on contact with water , protecting the egg from abrasion and fungal infection , while the outermost layer enables the eggs to be fastened on to a plant . 

  A pair of Atelopus frogs in amplexus . 

  Because males and females of this species encounter each other so infrequently , when they do meet they will remain stuck together for several months . 

  Spadefoots are nocturnal , and their eggs must be laid and fertilised during the night when the pond is relatively cool . 

  But by the middle of the following day , under the relentless desert sun , the temperature of the water can have reached 40 SYM C. The spadefoot has a number of ways of helping the developing embryo to survive this particular ordeal . 

  In the first few hours following fertilisation , the embryo is not particularly tolerant of high temperatures but , by the next day , its tolerance appears somehow to have increased . 

  It is certainly helped by the fact that the spadefoot toad's eggs are black , covered by a pigment called melanin which helps protect them from the sun's rays ( the same pigment is responsible for tanning in human beings ) . 

  In fact , most species of frogs and toads that lay their eggs in areas exposed to direct sunlight produce black eggs , whereas those species whose eggs develop in concealed places usually lay white eggs . 

  The way in which the female lays her eggs is also an important factor . 

  Each female lays 2,000-3,000 eggs . 

  These are laid in batches of several dozen and are then attached to submerged vegetation . 

  Different species of frogs and toads deposit and distribute their eggs in different ways . 

  Many frogs in the genus Rana produce large egg masses , whereas other species , like the spadefoot and many tree frogs , lay their eggs singly or in small groups , or in long strings , as in many other toads . 

  Laying and distributing the eggs in small batches is a special adaptation to these hot desert conditions . 

  Warm water holds less oxygen than cold water . 

  By laying their eggs in small strips or bundles attached to vegetation , spadefoots ensure that each individual egg is , as far as possible , surrounded by water and thus receives the maximum supply of available oxygen . 

  The embryo has one further aid in its struggle for survival . 

  The eggs develop extremely rapidly ; within a remarkable 24 hours of being laid , the eggs will have hatched . 

  The eggs of other frogs and toads not adapted to ephemeral pools may take as long as six weeks to hatch . 

  The race against time continues . 

  The spadefoot has one of the fastest rates of development of any frog or toad , but it still has to undergo the process known as metamorphosis -- the egg does not hatch into an adult , but into a tadpole , which has to reach a certain critical size before it can finally metamorphose into a tiny toad . 

  The pond in which the tadpole develops is only temporary , so it must complete its metamorphosis into a toad as quickly as possible . 

  This crucial transition can take tadpoles of other species -- those that develop in cold mountain streams , for example -- two or even three years to complete . 

  The spadefoot toad can manage the whole process , from egg to tadpole to toad , in as little as ten days . 

  The rapid development of the spadefoot tadpole is a feature shared by other frogs and toads that occupy temporary ponds , such as the European natterjack toad . 

  The rate of development of spadefoot tadpoles depends upon several factors , including water temperature and the number of other tadpoles around . 

  The number of tadpoles in a particular pond can have a dramatic effect on the food supply . 

  If the density of tadpoles is high , then food will be scarce . 

  As a result , development takes longer , a greater proportion of individuals die , and the survivors may actually be forced to change into toads at a smaller size . 

  The tadpoles of some spadefoot toads are gregarious and form large moving shoals . 

  Among the tadpoles of the eastern spadefoot , shoaling occurs only when the water level in the pond is decreasing . 

  The appearance of these shoals is striking for they consist of tadpoles of identical size . 

  Such social aggregations may be either a feeding adaptation or a means of avoiding predation . 

  Tadpoles normally feed on plankton and decaying plant material suspended in the water and shoals may effectively stir up the debris at the bottom of the pond , thus adding to the food supply . 

  In the plains spadefoot , however , the primary reason for shoaling is to avoid being eaten , since shoaling occurs only in the presence of such predators as snakes and the larvae of carnivorous water beetles . 

  These cannibalistic tadpoles make short work of one of their siblings . 

  As the waters of the pond slowly evaporate , crowding the tadpoles into an ever smaller volume and reducing still further the available food supply , an extraordinary transformation may take place . 

  One of the spadefoot's most remarkable adaptations is the tadpole's ability to change both its appearance and behaviour to become a cannibal . 

  In the western spadefoot of Europe , for example , there are two distinct forms of tadpole : a " standard " type which feeds on rotting vegetation , and a cannibalistic type which kills and eats other tadpoles . 

  Those tadpoles that turn into cannibals become larger , and develop a grotesquely shaped head with an enormous predatory mouth -- a change in appearance more appropriate to a horror film than a television natural history programme . 

  The extent to which spadefoot tadpoles become cannibalistic varies between the different species and according to ecological circumstance . 

  The tadpoles of Couch's spadefoot will attack weakened and partially metamorphosed individuals when the pond begins to dry out , but will not attack healthy tadpoles . 

  In other species , a proportion of cannibals is present whatever the circumstances , and will prey on minute shrimps and other freshwater animals as well as on their fellow tadpoles . 

  The gruesome ability of some individuals to take up a cannibalistic diet is , in evolutionary terms , a sensible solution to the problem of food shortage in a rapidly disappearing pond . 

  The spadefoot has , in fact , adopted a flexible strategy that allows it to cope with all eventualities . 

  It is known that both cannibalistic and non-cannibalistic individuals can and do develop from the same batch of eggs . 

  If the tadpole's normal food , decaying plant material , is abundant , then both types of tadpole develop and both types will survive to become adult . 

  But if this food is in short supply and the whole population is in danger of dying out , then cannibalism makes sense : it maximises the food supply and vastly increases the chance that some at least of the tadpoles will survive . 

  Like all adaptations , cannibalism must have first arisen by chance but , in the harsh environment of the desert , it is easy to see how this could have happened . 

  If a mutant batch of tadpoles with cannibalistic tendencies suddenly arose in a spadefoot population , they would tend to survive much better on those occasions when the pond was quickly drying out . 

  As a result , the genes for cannibalism would remain in the population . 

  Of course , it would be self-defeating if all tadpoles were to become cannibals , since none of them would then eat the plant material on which the chain depends . 

  While the idea of cannibalism may seem repugnant to us , it clearly has its advantages , and it is certainly not unique to spadefoot toads . 

  It also occurs in other amphibians that develop in crowded temporary ponds , for example the South American bullfrog . 

  There are also several poison arrow frogs of South America that show a rather different form of cannibalism . 

  These small frogs inhabit tropical rain forest and lay their eggs in the tiny " ponds " in the centre of bromeliad plants . 

  A single fertile egg is laid in each plant and each tadpole develops in the privacy of its own pool . 

  Not surprisingly , the food supply in such tiny pools is extremely limited . 

  To get round this problem , the tadpole's mother provides it with an unusual food parcel -- a supply of unfertilised eggs . 

  Obviously this is not true cannibalism as in the spadefoots , but it provides an example of how other frogs have found a parallel solution to the problem of rearing young when food is scarce . 

  Once the spadefoot's metamorphosis is complete the surviving toads leave the water . 

  Sometimes , as in the eastern spadefoot of Europe and south-west Asia , tadpoles form large groups during the final phase of their development . 

  As a result , vast numbers of tiny toads complete their metamorphosis and leave the pond within the same ten minute period at night -- a scene every bit as dramatic as the mass migrations of wildebeest in the Serengeti , but in miniature . 

  Obviously , since mating itself takes place mainly on the one night , and the development period is so compressed , one would expect the toadlets to emerge more or less together . 

  But such a high degree of synchrony is extraordinary and has not yet been explained . 

  It is possible that it has to do with cannibalism . 

  Since cannibalistic tadpoles feed preferentially on partially metamorphosed or weaker individuals , there would be a tendency for those likely to hatch earlier or later to be weeded out . 

  Even this does not seem a sufficient explanation . 

  Perhaps this synchronous transformation is the means by which the toads limit predation by their own kind . 

  Whatever the case , the mass emergence of spadefoot toads into the night is an unforgettable experience . 

  The young toads must continue to feed and grow before conditions become too dry again , but their battle for survival is not yet over . 

  At this stage immediately after metamorphosis , they are vulnerable to another unexpected source of predation . 

  In the mud around the edge of the pools , the larvae of a horsefly are developing . 

  These too need a rich food supply to complete their development , and the newly metamorphosed toads , just a few millimetres long , are exactly the right size . 

  The horsefly larvae use their two large jaws to capture the tiny toad and pull it down into the mud where they feed on its body fluids . 

  Even if they escape the attentions of the horsefly larvae , the young toads are still not safe . 

  Both young and fully grown adults are a favourite food for predatory desert animals , mainly snakes and the hognose snake in particular . 

  Spadefoot toads have a number of anti-predator tactics , one of which is to inflate the lungs and hence the body , which may fool the snake into thinking the toad is larger than it really is and act as a deterrent . 

  A spadefoot toadlet leaving the desert pond in search of food . 

  Its tail will shrink within a few hours of departure . 

  If this does not work , the spadefoot has a second line of defence ; it has a disagreeable odour and taste -- the New Mexico spadefoot has the curious distinction of smelling like unroasted peanuts . 

  Some species of frogs and toads even produce intensely toxic substances in their skin . 

  The deadly secretions in the skin of the poison arrow frogs of South and Central America are described in Venomous Animals ( see page 99 ) , but several species of toads produce cardiotoxic steroids in the skin and , in one species , the secretions are hallucinogenic . 

  Those young adults that survive all these various hazards join their parents in the important business of eating . 

  Feeding takes place at night and toads continue to forage for as long as conditions are reasonably humid , sometimes for as long as two months . 

  During the day they retreat into shallow burrows a few centimetres below the ground . 

  Their food consists of virtually any invertebrate small enough to swallow , including grasshoppers , spiders and caterpillars . 

  Left A spadefoot toad falls foul of one of its predators -- the hognose snake . 

  As with every other aspect of the desert life cycle , time is of the essence . 

  Soon the dry season will return and food supplies will disappear . 

  Before then , the toads have to lay in sufficient stores of energy to sustain them during their patient vigil underground . 

  Once the rainy season has ended , the surviving toads burrow once more deep into the desert soil . 

  They will remain there in a state of torpor , patiently awaiting the return of the rains . 

  But they may have to wait for a year , and maybe even two , before the brief , dramatic cycle can begin all over again . 

  Below A bullfrog from Kenya , East Africa , consuming a mouse . 

  The spadefoot toad feeds on smaller prey such as grasshoppers , spiders and caterpillars . 

  DEFENCES AGAINST DEHYDRATION 

  Amphibians are particularly prone to dehydration because of their permeable skins . 

  Those that live in dry climates have therefore found a variety of ways of avoiding water loss . 

  Some , like the South American burrowing frog , encase themselves inside a cocoon within a burrow . 

  The cocoon is formed by layers of parchment-like skin tissue , which completely envelops the frog , leaving only its nostrils exposed . 

  All amphibians shed their skin from time to time , but because the burrowing frog remains immobile once it is inside its burrow and cocoon formation has begun , the successive layers of shed skin remain attached to each other . 

  Laboratory studies of the South American burrowing frog showed that one layer of skin tissue was added daily for about 40 days to form the cocoon . 

  Not surprisingly , the more layers of the cocoon there are , the greater the protection from dehydration . 

  Tree frogs of the genus Phyllomedusa display a novel adaptation for avoiding desiccation . 

  These frogs live in the arid parts of South America and , as their name implies , they spend much of their lives in trees . 

  They therefore risk dehydration during the day from the dry air . 

  However , by covering themselves with a mixture of fats and waxes secreted by special glands in their skin , the frogs can avoid drying up . 

  Using a series of elaborate grooming movements , they spread the mixture all over their bodies . 

  When it dries , the frog has a covering which reduces evaporative water loss by 95 per cent . 

  LIFE IN DESERT POOLS 

  Spadefoot toads share their breeding pools with a number of other animals and plants . 

  A single downpour can rapidly transform a lifeless , shallow depression in the desert into a pool throbbing with life . 

  The first organisms , which appear within a few hours of the pool forming , are bacteria , as well as tiny single celled plants and animals called algae and protozoa respectively . 

  After just one or two days a variety of shimp-like organisms appear . 

  These include fairy shrimps , clam shrimps and tadpole shrimps . 

  It may seem odd to find these aquatic animals appearing in the desert , but the eggs of these shrimps probably lie all over the desert , collecting in the depressions which ultimately become pools . 

  These animals possess the remarkable ability to withstand intense heat and drought for prolonged periods of time . 

  They do this mainly as eggs , and then hatch out and develop rapidly once it rains and a pool forms . 

  The eggs of most species are small , and although they do not contain a large supply of nutrients they remain viable for years at a time , mainly because the tiny embryo is in a resting state . 

  In some species , the outer covering of the egg is waterproofed to prevent the embryo from drying out . 

  The eggs of the brine shrimp , for example , have almost unbelievable waterproofing and heat resistance . 

  In the laboratory their eggs can be heated to 98C for 16 hours and still hatch out as normal . 

  Indeed , in order to develop properly , brine shrimp eggs have to undergo a period of desiccation . 

  The eggs of other shrimps , by contrast , are not waterproof , but possess thick spongy coverings which protect them from bright sunlight and abrasion . 

  These are important survival factors since the egg is the dispersal stage in the shrimp's life cycle . 

  The eggs need to be well protected since they are carried on the wind , continually exposed to the sun's fierce rays , and blown across the sand . 

  When these desert shrimps reproduce , the eggs are protected and carried by the female , either in a special sac-like structure as in the brine shrimp , or in a special pouch as in the tadpole shrimp . 

  In some species , only females appear to exist -- males are either extremely rare or non-existent . 

  Females can reproduce asexually , that is without fertilisation by a male . 

  This allows for very rapid reproduction . 

  The same pattern of asexual reproduction occurs in water fleas , aphids and even a few lizards . 

  AMPHIBIAN BREEDING STRATEGY 

  Frogs and toads can be divided into two breeding types , " explosive breeders " and " prolonged breeders " . 

  In explosive breeding , all reproductive activity is packed into a few days , with the result that it is highly synchronised . 

  It is typical of species that breed in short-lived pools , like the spadefoot toad . 

  But explosive breeding also occurs in many North American , European and Asian species that breed in permanent pools . 

  In these species mating occurs in early spring and rapid breeding may be an adaptation to avoid predation . 

  In prolonged breeding , on the other hand , mating takes place over much longer periods of time , or indeed throughout the year . 

  It is characteristic of frogs and toads that live in more stable or predictable environments . 

  The breeding aggregations of explosive breeders can be extraordinarily dense . 

  In most species , the males compete vigorously for potential mates , grasping virtually anything that comes in reach including inanimate objects and other males . 

  If another male is grabbed he will give a release call . 

  The over-zealous male then realises his mistake , lets him go and carries on searching for a female . 

  Once a female is grabbed in amplexus the male is likely to have to defend her from other males , and fights lasting hours or days and involving several males have been witnessed in numerous species . 

  Prolonged breeders do not form such dense aggregations . 

  Instead , males tend to be spaced out in territories , and they attract females to them by calling . 

  Female frogs will readily approach loudspeakers broadcasting frog calls , demonstrating that it is the call alone that attracts them . 

  Since females in these species become available to males over a period of weeks or months , the possibility exists for some males to mate with several females during the course of a breeding season . 

  For example , in a study of the North American green frog , three out of 25 males mated between two and five times , and accounted for 47 per cent of all matings observed . 

  In contrast , among the explosively breeding European common frog only one out of 33 males mated twice , and 16 did not mate at all . 

  The theory that amplexus is a form of " mate guarding " by males , preventing others from mating with the same female , is confirmed by comparing the duration of amplexus in explosive breeding European common frog , only one out Among explosive breeders , competition between males for females is intense and amplexus may last for several days or even for the entire breeding period . 

  In contrast , among prolonged breeders , amplexus lasts a few hours at most . 

  Explosive breeders also show a further adaptation to male competition -- the development of enlarged nuptial pads on their hands . 

  These pads are not needed simply to hold on to the female , who remains passive . 

  Instead , their function is to help the male prevent others from taking the female from him . 

  In the frog Atelopus the male and female remain in amplexus for several months . 

  During this time the male is unable to feed properly and becomes severely emaciated . 

  It is not clear why this species has such a long period of amplexus ; it is not an explosive breeder . 

  One suggestion is that males and females rarely encounter each other . 

  When they do , it is important that they literally stick together until they breed . 

  The nuptial pads on a male frog's feet enable him to grip on to the females tightly when mating . 

  This helps him to secure the female from the advances of other males . 

  Within prolonged breeding species , individual frogs or toads have developed a variety of different reproductive strategies . 

  The North American bullfrog demonstrates three of them . 

  The first is the one adopted by the largest males : these defend territories in the pond and call to attract females who will lay their eggs there . 

  These territories provide ideal conditions for the development of the eggs . 

  The second is what biologists call the " satellite strategy " and is the one followed by smaller males , who do not call but try to intercept females on their way to territory owners . 

  The third strategy involves intermediate-sized males behaving opportunistically : they call from potential egg-laying sites but do not defend territories . 

  Alternative breeding strategies are also shown by many tree frogs in the genus Hyla , which typically call from positions that are not egg-laying sites . 

  The two main strategies are " caller " and " satellite " and , just as in bullfrogs , the satellites are smaller , silent and try to waylay females attracted to the callers . 

  In some tree frog species certain individuals always call while others are always satellites . 

  In other species individuals can switch strategies to become either caller or satellite depending on local conditions . 

  Here the larger male bullfrog can take his pick from four females . 

  The European natterjack toad is a prolonged breeder . 

  It is a small species with a distinctive yellow stripe down its back . 

  Mating takes place at night in shallow pools in dunes and other sandy areas . 

  Males sit in groups of three or four , the largest male calling from the centre of the group while the others act as silent satellites . 

  In an experiment carried out by Anthony Arak , a zoologist from Cambridge University , the large calling male was removed from ten groups ; in eight cases the other group members dispersed . 

  In contrast , when a satellite was removed from nine other groups , in only one case did the others disperse . 

  This strongly suggests that the peripheral males are exploiting the calling male's ability to attract females . 

  SURVIVING WITHOUT WATER 

  Most desert-living animals can withstand some water loss , but none can match the spadefoot and its desert-living cousins . 

  Small desert rodents and the Bedouin goat can survive short periods of dehydration which result in a 20-30 per cent weight loss . 

  Among mammals , however , the desert camel shows the greatest tolerance to dehydration . 

  Whereas most large mammals can survive no more than 14 per cent water loss , the camel can survive an amazing 30 per cent loss for over a week quite easily . 

  It does this by losing water from the reserves in its stomach and from the body tissues . 

  Some vertebrates , including ourselves , lose water from the blood . 

  This impairs the circulation which then means that the body can not lose excess heat . 

  The result is a dramatic increase in body temperature , until at 43 SYM C death occurs . 

  Camels can recover rapidly from dehydration by drinking sometimes vast quantities of water . 

  Camels that have lost 20 per cent of their weight through dehydration can regain this in just ten minutes of drinking . 

  One dehydrated camel drank 186 litres of water in two bouts of 94 and 92 litres . 

  The lethal limit of dehydration in humans is equivalent to about 18-20 per cent of body weight . 

  One man was lost in the Mexican desert for eight days , having had only enough water with him for one day . 

  The man survived , and this appears to be the record for a human being . 

  Most of the legendary tales about the camel " s ability to survive for long periods without water are true . 

  This nomad is leading his camels to a water hole after five dry days in the desert . 

  VENOMOUS ANIMALS 

  In the heart of the African rain forest a chameleon crouches on a branch , stalking an insect . 

  This arboreal lizard is a formidable predator . 

  It has binocular vision for locating its prey and now rests motionless , waiting for the potential victim to come closer . 

  The chameleon will then dart out its long , sticky-tipped tongue , impale the insect and swallow it . 

  On this occasion , however , the hunter becomes the hunted . 

  So intense is the chameleon's concentration that it is quite unaware of imminent danger . 

  Slithering unseen and unheard through the branches , a green mamba is itself planning to make a kill . 

  The moment it is within range it strikes with sudden speed , burying its fangs in the soft neck tissues of its prey . 

  The snake's venom courses through the bloodstream of the chameleon , causing instant paralysis . 

  In a matter of seconds it is dead . 

  Green and black mambas are among the most venomous snakes in the world ; and for most people , snakes , of all animals , have the most sinister reputation . 

  Snake bites cause the deaths of over 100,000 people every year . 

  What is not so generally realised is that many deaths and serious illnesses also result from the poisonous substances produced by a range of other animals . 

  Although " venom " and " poison " are often used indiscriminately to describe toxic substances , we could make the distinction here between them . 

  Animals that are venomous secrete toxic matter and inject it by biting or stinging or by some other means . 

  Poisonous animals secrete lethal toxins but do not actively attack other creatures with them . 

  However , they can equally make people or other animals extremely ill , perhaps fatally so , if they are eaten . 

  Despite the distinction , the results can be similar . 

  Opposite A prairie rattler . 

  Snake bites cause the death of over 100,000 people every year . 

  A Portuguese man-o'-war blown ashore on the Florida coast . 

  The dangerous stinging tentacles hang down below the float . 

  Poisons and venoms are important survival factors for many creatures . 

  Some animals , such as venomous snakes and spiders , inject venoms in order to immobilise and kill their prey . 

  Others employ them essentially in self-defence ; the honey bee , for example , uses its sting to protect its colony . 

  Sometimes , however , the distinction is less clear cut : thus the spitting cobra's venom serves both to subdue prey and as a means of self-protection . 

  And among those animals which secrete poisons but have no means of injecting them , their function is usually defensive : in the case of certain tropical sea-urchins , it makes the eggs distasteful to predators . 

  Many venomous creatures , in appearance innocent and harmless , inhabit the oceans . 

  The Portuguese man-o'-war looks like a single organism but is in fact composed of numerous individual polyps , which resemble sea-anemones . 

  Some of these are responsible for capturing and digesting food , while others form the gas-filled blue balloon which allows the animal to float on the sea's surface . 

  Each of the many feeding individuals in the colony possesses an extremely long tentacle which bears large numbers of stinging cells known as nematocysts . 

  Each stinging cell consists of a venom capsule and a reversible , barbed sting , evolved in order to capture prey such as surface-feeding fish . 

  When a mackerel or a flying fish , for example , inadvertently grazes a tentacle , hundreds of nematocysts fire and inject their venom into the victim , which is quickly paralysed and killed . 

  The fish is then passed up into the mouths of the feeding individuals , and the ingested food is shared among all the other ( non-feeding ) members of the colony through a series of cavities . 

  If a human swimmer collides with a Portuguese man-o'-war , the consequences can be very dangerous . 

  Severe pain , muscle seizure and heart failure may end in rapid death ; or the pain may be so intense that the victim is unable to swim and drowns . 

  However , if he or she survives the first half hour , there is a good chance of complete recovery . 

  An underwater view of a jellyfish -- this is the aptly named sea nettle . 

  Though not as deadly as the sea wasp , this jellyfish can cause severe irritation if it stings a human . 

  The little-known sea wasp , in spite of its name , is actually a jellyfish . 

  Like the Portuguese man-o'-war , it is equipped with nematocysts , used for catching prey . 

  Its feeding technique is also similar : drifting downward through the water , it captures small fish or plankton with its tentacles . 

  A tropical species , the sea wasp occurs around the coast of Australia . 

  Measuring about 20 cm ( 8 in ) across , but with tentacles over 1 m ( 3 ft ) long , it is translucent light blue and difficult to see . 

  It is much more dangerous to humans than the man-o'-war , and several hundred fatalities have been recorded ; death is so sudden that no treatment is possible . 

  Relatively few molluscs -- snails and their relatives -- are venomous , although some are poisonous when eaten because they accumulate toxic substances through feeding . 

  Mussels use their gills to filter tiny prey out of the water . 

  During the summer these may include small animals known as dinoflagellates , which produce toxic waste products . 

  If the mussel is eaten by an animal or by a person , the poisons that have built up inside the mollusc may prove fatal . 

  About 8 per cent of all known cases involving human beings result in death . 

  There are two types of mollusc that are actively venomous : the cone shells and the blue-ringed octopus . 

  Cone shells are marine snails of tropical waters with specialised predatory habits . 

  Unlike most snails , which are harmless and graze on plant material , the cones possess a long feeding " nose " , the proboscis , which bears barbed teeth and venom . 

  The proboscis can be shot out forcibly , stabbing its prey . 

  Different species of cones specialise in different types of prey , mainly comprising worms , other molluscs and fish , and have specific venoms to deal with each of their prey . 

  The victim is usually speared with the barbed teeth in the proboscis and quickly killed by the venom which is injected at the same time . 

  The prey is then drawn up to the mouth and swallowed whole . 

  The venom from worm-killing cones is harmless to humans , and that of the mollusc-feeding cones seldom has serious consequences . 

  But a bite from a fish-feeding cone can be both painful and dangerous . 

  Some of these cones are quite large , with teeth 2 cm ( almost 1 in ) long ; the fast-acting venom causes paralysis , breathing difficulties and sometimes death . 

  Many sea-urchins of temperate waters have tiny pronged pincers , often provided with poison glands . 

  The poison is seldom dangerous but anyone who has accidentally trodden on a sea-urchin while bathing knows how painful the swelling can be . 

  In tropical oceans there are some species whose reproductive organs are toxic , making its eggs distasteful to predators , it is thought . 

  Unfortunately , the insides of these sea-urchins are considered by some peoples to be a delicacy eaten raw and so are potentially dangerous . 

  Although the symptoms are extremely unpleasant ( nausea , diarrhoea , vomiting and headache ) , few people have died . 

  Australia is host to some of the world's most dangerous animals . 

  One of these is the infamous blue-ringed octopus . 

  This , too , is a mollusc , closely related to squids and cuttlefish , and together they comprise a group of animals known as cephalopods . 

  This literally means " head-foot " , for the head is situated next to the numerous legs , or sucker-bearing tentacles . 

  All cephalopods are carnivores , feeding on fish , shrimps and crabs , which they catch with the tentacles . 

  Prey is immediately carried to the mouth and killed with a bite from the bird-like beak , tucked away among the tentacles . 

  The blue-ringed octopus , which lives in the subtropical and temperate shallow waters off eastern Australia , is comparatively small , with a diameter of only 20 cm ( 8 in ) . 

  It is dark brown , but attractively decorated with circles of electric blue . 

  Like many cephalopods , it has a curious life cycle : after growing very rapidly , reaching sexual maturity in just four months , it dies after a single breeding session . 

  The octopus kills its prey , mainly small crabs , by biting them and injecting highly toxic saliva into the wound . 

  If handled or disturbed , the blue-ringed octopus may also attack a human , and although the bite is painless the symptoms are dramatic : vomiting , temporary blindness and lack of muscle coordination . 

  Death usually results within two to three hours of the bite . 

  All fatalities associated with this species have occurred when swimmers or divers have casually picked up and handled the octopus . 

  Pufferfish , such as this spotted species from the Cigenter river in Java , Indonesia , could poison you if you ate one during its spawning season . 

  There are about 30,000 species of fish in the world and some 250 of these are actively venomous , possessing spines and venom glands . 

  In almost all cases this venom is used as a means of defence , and most people are stung after handling or stepping on a fish . 

  The principal venomous species include the scorpion fish , stingrays , weaverfish , rockfish and waspfish . 

  However some fish , such as the puffer fish , produce poisons as a by-product of their natural metabolisms . 

  The puffer fish is found in warmer parts of the world both in sea water and fresh water . 

  It has the strange ability to blow itself up with either air or water as a means of self-defence . 

  The poison , which is a naturally occurring by-product , is found mainly in the liver , intestine and reproductive system and finds its way into the eggs . 

  The fish is dangerous if eaten from May to July just before spawning . 

  About 60 per cent of people who are poisoned by puffer fish die -- usually within six to twenty-four hours -- from respiratory paralysis . 

  There is no known antidote to this poison . 

  Astonishingly , the fish is considered a delicacy in Japan where it is known as " fugu " ; but because of its toxicity it can only be prepared by licensed chefs . 

  The splendid-looking scorpion fish can be found around coral reefs , but you are well advised to give them a wide berth as their venom can be fatal . 

  The scorpion fish , so named because the effect of its sting is much like that of a scorpion , is a dramatically beautiful reef fish , boldly striped in red , pink and white , measuring 10-15 cm ( 4-6 in ) in length , with greatly elongated fins . 

  Almost all the major fins possess spines and venom glands . 

  For anyone rash enough to seize it , the effect is instantaneous -- searing pain , swelling , convulsions , unconsciousness and sometimes death . 

  In contrast to the scorpion fish , which flaunts itself , the stonefish and sculpins , which occur throughout the world , are superbly camouflaged , resting on the sea bed waiting for unsuspecting prey to swim past . 

  The spines are situated on the dorsal fin and around the head and it is all too easy to step on them by mistake . 

  The symptoms of poisoning are similar to those inflicted by the sting of a scorpion fish . 

  Accidents involving bathers are especially common in the waters off north-eastern Australia , but happily an effective anti-venin is now available . 

  The group of jointed animals known as arthropods includes scorpions and spiders , and almost all of these are venomous . 

  Scorpions occur in the warmer parts of the world and are nocturnal by habit , hiding by day in holes or under stones . 

  Most species measure 2-3 cm ( about 1 in ) ; the largest ever recorded , at over 30 cm ( 12 in ) , is now mercifully extinct . 

  The elongated body of the scorpion is armed at one end with two powerful claws and at the other with a long tail terminating in a sting . 

  Scorpions are carnivorous and feed mainly on insects which they catch with their claws and then kill by stinging . 

  The stinging apparatus consists of a sharp barb and a bulbous base which contains the venom-producing glands . 

  These glands are surrounded by sheets of muscle which , when contracted , squeeze the venom out into the barb . 

  Males and females are similar in appearance , although the males have slightly longer claws . 

  Scorpions are much feared , and with justification . 

  Today an estimated 150,000 people are stung each year but less than 1 per cent of these attacks prove fatal . 

  Almost half of the incidents occur in Mexico , where a particularly dangerous scorpion , Centruroides , is common . 

  Scorpions seldom go out of their way to attack people and accidents usually happen when scorpions are trodden on . 

  However , not all scorpions are venomous and the same species in different parts of the world differ in their toxicity . 

  For example , a sting from Buthus occitanus is likely to be fatal in North Africa , but in France the species , for reasons unexplained , is completely harmless . 

  Scorpions will only sting a person if threatened or if accidentally trodden on . 

  Spiders are close relatives of scorpions and many of them can deliver a painful bite . 

  The spider's mouthparts comprise two jaw-like chelicerae , each tipped with a sharp fang . 

  The fangs are hollow and are linked to a venom gland . 

  When a spider bites its prey , the fangs are driven into the victim and at the same time the venom is discharged from the gland , down the fangs and into the wound . 

  The venom of most spiders , though effective against their insect prey , is harmless to man . 

  Only a handful of species are dangerous . 

  These include the black widow spiders , found in North and South America , Africa and many parts of Australia , and , to a lesser extent , tarantulas . 

  Spider venoms fall into two main categories : those which affect the nervous system ( neurotoxins ) and those that produce a necrosis , or death of the body tissues . 

  The black widow spider and its relatives produce neurotoxins . 

  Although these spiders are rarely aggressive and generally bite humans only in self-defence , farm workers are particularly at risk ; and in some areas with outside lavatories , such spiders are known to lurk under the seats . 

  The bite itself may be painless and even go unnoticed , but within ten minutes to one hour symptoms start to appear ; a dull pain spreads from the region of the bite and gradually becomes more severe , causing cramps , vomiting , perspiration and copious salivation . 

  In most cases , these symptoms persist for a couple of days . 

  An anti-venin is available , however , and the majority of victims survive ; less than 5 per cent of people bitten by black widow spiders die and in the United States only one or two deaths occur each year . 

  Rudyard Kipling's observation that " the female of the species is more deadly than the male " is true in the case of the black widow spider . 

  The males are small and harmless to humans , but the female is larger with a black abdomen bearing a bright red mark -- a useful warning sign . 

  The 13 cm ( 5 in ) long Costa Rican wolf spider feeds on frogs . 

  It kills its victims with venomous fangs . 

  If you touch a wolf spider with your finger the sharp spines on top of the body and the legs will cause you searing pain . 

  Centipedes , like spiders , kill their prey by injecting venom into them with a pair of large fangs , each of which is equipped with a venom gland . 

  As a rule the victim is an insect , but certain large centipedes -- and they may measure up to 30 cm ( 12 in ) long -- have been seen to capture toads and mice . 

  Some of the large species , if picked up or trodden upon , can give a painful bite ; but none are really dangerous and few human fatalities have resulted . 

  Butterflies and moths are among the most beautiful insects and one does not expect them to be venomous or poisonous . 

  Yet the caterpillars of a few species are well protected from predators ; they are highly distasteful , possessing a coat of irritant hairs , while others bear spines and venom . 

  Those that taste unpleasant obtain their " flavour " from the plants they eat . 

  The caterpillar of the monarch butterfly feeds on milkweeds . 

  The plant toxin renders both the caterpillar and the adult butterfly particularly repellent to natural enemies . 

  Venomous caterpillars , such as the North American saddleback , often have warning colours and numerous outgrowths from their body which bear venomous spines . 

  These are either barbed or glass-like , and inject a venom into the predator's skin , usually in the mouth region . 

  If a human picks up one of these caterpillars , the painful sting may cause nausea and an unpleasant swelling at the point of contact . 

  The wasp's stinging apparatus . 

  Of all the insects , bees and wasps are the most commonly encountered " stingers " . 

  Together with ants , they are collectively known as the Hymenoptera , and they occur throughout the world ; some bumblebees even inhabit the high Arctic region . 

  Only the females are capable of stinging . 

  In most insects the eggs are laid through a special egg-laying tube , the ovipositor . 

  However , in bees and wasps the ovipositor has been modified in the course of evolution to become the sting . 

  Since males never had an ovipositor , they do not possess a sting , and can be handled quite safely . 

  It is difficult at the best of times , however , to distinguish the sexes , and only of academic interest once stung . 

  Worker wasps and bees will use their sting to defend their colony's nest from predators . 

  Alighting on the invading animal , the wasp or bee grasps hold with the jaws and thrusts in its barbed sting . 

  The venom gland contracts and the venom shoots through a special canal into the wound . 

  Unlike the wasp , a honey bee's sting is barbed in such a way that it can not retract once buried in its victim . 

  Once it has stung , the bee flies off , tearing its body away from the sting and stinging apparatus , leaving them embedded in the victim . 

  Later the bee will die as a result . 

  This might appear to be the ultimate sacrifice on behalf of the colony , but all the bees in the colony are genetically related . 

  The workers who defend it are all sisters and all sterile . 

  By giving up their lives to protect their nest mates , they are promoting their own genes through their relatives . 

  For a human being a wasp or bee sting is always painful , but not necessarily serious . 

  Some people feel it as no more irritating than the sting of a nettle , and have survived multiple stings ; others , who are allergic to the venom , may experience unpleasant effects or worse from a single sting . 

  During the years 1949-69 at least 70 people are known to have died in England and Wales from wasp stings , but deaths from bee stings are less frequent . 

  Several animals are able to withstand such stings and actually feed on various portions of wasps , bees and their nests . 

  In Africa , the honey badger , or ratel , is impervious to the bee's stings , ripping open the nest to consume the honey and bee larvae . 

  It is often led to the nest by a curious bird known as the honeyguide . 

  This bird , too , is indifferent to the angry bees and not only feeds on anything left over by the ratel but also on the wax combs in the nest , having the ability to digest wax by means of bacteria in its gut . 

  In northern Europe , the common badger regularly digs up the nests of wasps and rarely appears to be bothered by their stings . 

  And the predatory honey buzzard , although it does not eat honey , will excavate wasps' nests to feed on the grubs , protected from stings by its dense plumage and scaly legs . 

  The amphibians -- frogs , toads and salamanders -- contain several poisonous species but no actively venomous ones . 

  All poisonous amphibia use their toxins as a means of self-defence and not to catch prey . 

  The toxins defend them against predators , and most interestingly against the effects of bacteria and fungi . 

  Terrestrial amphibians respire through their skin and to do this must keep it moist with mucus . 

  The damp surface is an ideal environment for micro-organisms to grow , and protection against them is often provided by special poison-producing glands all over the skin . 

  It has long been known that amphibian skin contains strong chemicals . 

  Over 3,000 years ago powdered toads were used as ingredients in Chinese and Japanese medicines . 

  The same concoction is still used today for treatment of dropsy , a disease where excess fluid collects in the body tissues . 

  Dogs that bite toads usually come off second best . 

  Within seconds , the toxins from the toad's skin enter the dog's bloodstream through the thin mouth tissues , resulting in retching , foaming at the mouth , and , in extreme cases , death . 

  Most toads are cryptically coloured , blending with the surroundings , but one group of amphibians , the poison arrow frogs , from the rain forests of Central and South America , advertise their toxicity . 

  These animals are small , only an inch or so in length , and their spectacular coloration makes them look like tiny jewels . 

  The toxins secreted by the skin are among the most poisonous substances known , and these frogs are so named because the Noamana , Choco and Cuna Indians of Colombia use the poison to tip their arrows and blow-darts . 

  The frogs are collected and cooked over a fire until the poisonous , milky skin secretions appear ; these are then scraped on to the weapons . 

  The poison is so effective that a single dart can kill a monkey in seconds . 

  The poison arrow frogs of Colombia are roasted by South American Indians to extract the poison from their skin . 

  The Indians then anoint the tips of their arrows with the poison . 

  Snakes , tortoises , crocodiles and lizards are all reptiles . 

  Together with spiders , snakes are among the animals most feared by man , although most species are harmless . 

  No tortoises or crocodiles are venomous and only two lizards are , namely the gila ( pronounced " heela " ) monster and the closely related Mexican beaded lizard . 

  Both have a stout , chunky appearance , the gila monster being slightly smaller , reaching 60 cm ( 24 in ) in length , the beaded lizard growing to 75 cm ( 30 in ) ; and both are inhabitants of the south-western desert regions of North America , including Arizona . 

  These two lizards use their venom to kill their prey , which comprises small mammals such as mice and birds . 

  They also eat the eggs of birds and other reptiles . 

  The venom glands are modified salivary glands located in the lower jaws . 

  The teeth are specially grooved so that when the lizard bites , the venom runs down the outside of the teeth into the wound . 

  The venom is particularly effective against birds and mammals , but less so against frogs . 

  The prey is located by means of smell , using the tongue and a special gland situated near the roof of the mouth . 

  Gila monsters and beaded lizards are generally nocturnal and hunt mainly on the ground . 

  Their large , fat tails contain food reserves , utilised when feeding conditions are poor . 

  Although their bite is extremely painful to man , they are not aggressive and most people are bitten while handling them . 

  This can be a frightening experience because when a gila monster bites , it does not let go for some ten to fifteen minutes , during which time it continues to chew , injecting more and more venom into the wound . 

  Symptoms include localised pain and numbness followed by breathing difficulties . 

  Fortunately , however , there are few fatalities . 

  Indeed , man is much more of a threat to these lizards , by keeping them as pets ; their existence in the wild is now threatened by collectors . 

  Once the gila monster gets its teeth into its prey it will not let go . 

  It chews and bites the venom into its victims , generally small mammals and birds . 

  There are about 2,700 species of snake in the world , yet only 50 or so are highly venomous . 

  The most feared of these include the saw-scaled viper , the king cobra , the green and black mambas , Russell's viper , and the lancehead viper or fer-de-lance . 

  Unlike more primitive snakes such as pythons and boas , which constrict and suffocate their prey , these more " advanced " species subdue or kill their victims by injecting them with venom . 

  Their prey may range from insects , snails and lizards to rodents , birds , birds' eggs and small mammals . 

  Snake venoms have different effects , some simply weakening or disorienting , others paralysing or killing the prey . 

  But they can also be used against predators . 

  The amazing habit of the spitting cobra of squirting venom for a distance of several feet into the eyes of other animals , including humans , is mainly a defence reaction . 

  As a rule , snakes have simple teeth , all roughly the same shape , long , pointed and directed backwards when the mouth is closed . 

  The front teeth of venomous snakes may be modified to conduct venom from the glands in the upper jaw to the tip of the tooth . 

  In many species these teeth are hollow along most of their length . 

  For example , in the rattlesnake the upper end of the tooth near the jaw has a large inlet for venom ( the basal orifice ) , and a smaller outlet close to the tooth's tip ( the distal orifice ) . 

  In some snakes the fangs are hinged and are folded back along the roof of the mouth ; when the snake is about to strike , the fangs flip forward into their striking position . 

  The Gaboon viper holds the record for the longest fangs -- of the snake's 3 m ( 10 ft ) length , the fangs measure almost 3 cm ( 1 in ) . 

  The deadly spitting cobra of East Africa . 

  A rattlesnake's fangs are neatly folded away when not in use but are swung forward for the strike . 

  The snake's venom glands are modified salivary glands , and the venom modified saliva . 

  Snake venom is usually clear yellow and is dangerous only if it gets into the bloodstream . 

  The amount of venom injected varies from species to species , ranging from a few microlitres in highly venomous sea snakes to six or seven millilitres in the diamondback rattlers and pit vipers . 

  In snakes like the black mamba , cobras and Russell's viper , the amount injected in one bite far exceeds that necessary to kill a man . 

  Moreover , snakes never inject all their venom in a single strike , so that they are always ready to bite their prey or attacker again . 

  Snake venoms work in several ways . 

  Some types of venom damage the walls of blood vessels and also prevent blood from clotting . 

  Others act on the nervous system , blocking nerve transmission and causing paralysis of the heart and lungs . 

  Certain snake venoms contain a mixture of both substances . 

  The Gaboon viper of Africa : its large venom glands account for the distorted arrow shape of its head . 

  Human deaths from snake bites are caused mainly by accident . 

  In the Indian subcontinent , where large numbers of people work on the land , it is estimated that many thousands of people die from snake bites every year . 

  Treatment varies from the most simple cut-and-suck method to the more sophisticated use of anti-venins . 

  The latter are increasingly available but specific for each kind of snake , so that immediate and accurate identification of the species is essential . 

  As with bites from other venomous animals , young and elderly people are most at risk ; and even if a bite is not fatal , it may cause massive tissue damage , so that hospitalisation is often necessary . 

  The cobras have marine relatives in the sea snakes , which probably evolved from Australian ancestors . 

  Approximately 80 per cent of the Australian species are venomous . 

  They show a range of survival factors associated with their aquatic life . 

  Some spend their entire time in the water , mating and giving birth to live young in the sea . 

  A few come ashore to lay eggs , usually in caves . 

  Most sea snakes have a compressed , oar-like tail , used for propulsion through the water . 

  When diving , they can also seal their nostrils and mouth . 

  The extreme toxicity of their venom enables them to kill their main prey -- eels -- very rapidly and thus prevent them from wriggling free . 

  Fishermen of tropical seas who regularly catch sea snakes display little or no fear of them , handling them with impunity and either killing them or throwing them back in the water . 

  The reason for such nonchalance is that the snakes seldom bite people and , even if they do , rarely inject much venom . 

  Their bites are , however , extremely effective in subduing the prey . 

  There are a few venomous mammals , including certain shrews . 

  Some water shrews and one long-snouted shrew-like animal known as Solenodon , which inhabits Hispaniola and Cuba , possess poisonous saliva . 

  Injected when the animal . bites , the saliva causes paralysis . 

  Some water shrews feed on relatively large fish or newts , so it is important for them to immobilise their prey rapidly . 

  The Solenodon eats insects and the occasional bird , reptile or amphibian . 

  Only one or two young are born at a time and they are transported in an unusual manner by the mother -- by hanging on to her greatly elongated teats . 

  The duck-billed platypus is an even more astonishing animal . 

  And it is venomous , too . 

  When the body of one specimen was first brought from Australia to Britain in 1798 , it was considered to be some kind of taxidermist's hoax -- a mixture of bird and mammal -- which , to some extent , it is . 

  The platypus , along with its cousins the echidnas , is an egg-laying mammal yet suckles its young on milk ! 

  Confined to eastern Australia , the platypus spends virtually its whole life in freshwater streams . 

  It is covered in a dense , waterproof fur and has webbed forefeet and partially webbed hind feet . 

  Its best-known feature is its soft and pliable duck-like beak . 

  The male platypus possesses on its hind legs a large , reversible spur . 

  This is usually tucked away under a fold of skin but it can be quickly erected and used as a weapon . 

  The hollow spur is connected to a venom gland situated behind the knee , and can inflict an agonising wound . 

  It is employed in defence , and has been known to kill a dog . 

  However , the male platypus also makes use of it when competing for territory along a river , although its effect on rival males is not known . 

  How the platypus came to acquire this apparatus remains a mystery : few venomous animals use their venom when fighting among themselves , and it has therefore been suggested that the venom gland is a survival factor originally directed against some long-extinct predator . 

  This seems unlikely , however , because one might expect females to be just as much in need of protection as males . 

  It is curious , too , to note that echidnas also possess spurs but their venom gland is non-functional . 

  The toxic nature of some animals has been known for a long time and man has utilised their venoms and poisons for various purposes . 

  Native peoples in Africa and South America have employed animal toxins to help them catch prey ; Kalahari bushmen anoint their hunting arrows with the squashed contents of beetle larvae to produce a slow-acting poison , and the Colombian Indians , as described , dip their blow-darts into the secretion of the poison arrow frog . 

  Yet if many of the toxic chemicals that animals possess have evolved in order to aid survival , either by predation or protection , it may well be that some of these compounds could assist our own survival . 

  Understanding how animal venoms and toxins work may one day help to cure human diseases , and experimentation is under way . 

  Many toxins , such as snake venoms , operate through the victim's nervous system and are being used in the treatment of human nervous disorders . 

  And the venom of the notorious black widow spider , far more potent than that of a rattlesnake , is now being utilised to treat disabling diseases of the nervous and muscular systems . 

  So , given sufficient time , interest and means , it is possible that the hitherto dangerous survival factors possessed by animals may become our own means of survival . 

  Scientists are now making use of the black widow spider's venom to help them understand disabling human diseases . 

  THE MONARCH BUTTERFLY 

  The monarch butterfly , found over much of North America , has been much studied because of its noxious qualities . 

  The females lay their eggs on milkweed and the caterpillars feed on these plants until they pupate , prior to emerging as butterflies . 

  As protection against herbivores such as caterpillars , the milkweed produces chemical deterrents on its leaves . 

  These substances , referred to as cardiac glycosides , have no adverse effect on the monarch caterpillar and it can accumulate and store these chemicals for its own use . 

  The glycosides are even retained as the caterpillar changes into a butterfly and help to protect it from predatory birds . 

  It is especially interesting that the highest concentrations of the toxins occur in the butterfly's wings rather than in its body . 

  The advantage for the butterfly is that if a bird seizes it by the wings , and is reminded of some earlier unpleasant experience with the species and its toxin , it will release the insect unharmed : a bluejay that has never seen a monarch butterfly will readily catch and eat it ; but within 15-30 minutes the toxins in the butterfly's body cause the bird to vomit , and one such encounter is sufficient to make a bluejay avoid monarchs thereafter . 

  In addition to being distasteful , the monarch is warningly coloured with black and orange stripes , should the bluejay need another reminder . 

  Both the caterpillar and adult of the monarch butterfly are distasteful to their enemies . 

  They obtain their unpleasant flavour from the milkweed plant . 

  WARNING COLORATION 

  Many poisonous or venomous animals advertise their dangerous defences with bright colours . 

  The poison arrow frogs are one example , while many bees and wasps bear characteristic black and yellow stripes . 

  Most animals quickly learn to keep clear of boldly striped insects , particularly if they sting . 

  In a few species such recognition may be inborn , but in the majority it has to be learned by experience . 

  This poses an intriguing evolutionary problem . 

  Most predators probably have to sample and kill at least one wasp or bee before they learn to identify it as unpleasant . 

  If a wasp or bee has to die in order to convey the message of its coloration , how did warning colours evolve in the first place ? 

  The answer is linked with the fact that many distasteful or venomous animals live in social groups . 

  Such groups consist of closely related individuals , and in evolutionary terms at least it is worth one of them dying to help the others , in order that a predator may learn not to touch them again . 

  Warning colours presumably evolved because such striking patterns are easily recognised and the lesson quickly learned . 

  The yellow and black bands of the wasp are recognised as dangerous by man and beast . 

  It is only the females that sting , but it is not easy to tell the difference between the sexes . 

  Some non-venomous and non-poisonous animals have exploited the fact that predators tend to avoid warningly coloured individuals . 

  These quite palatable species therefore mimic the more dangerous ones and benefit from the similarity . 

  Many flies , especially hoverflies , are banded black and yellow , resembling wasps . 

  And there are several toxic butterflies , like the monarch , which have their harmless mimics , such as the viceroy . 

  This form of impersonation , discovered by Henry Bates while collecting insects in South America , is referred to as Batesian mimicry . 

  Other examples include edible cockroaches which mimic ladybirds , squirrels that mimic inedible tree shrews and one grasshopper which mimics the bombardier beetle . 

  This beetle discharges a very hot fluid from a special gland at potential predators . 

  A second form of mimicry , discovered by Fritz Muller , who likewise collected butterflies in Brazil , involves several distasteful species resembling one another . 

  Several species of bees and wasps , as well as butterflies , display Mllerian mimicry . 

  RATTLESNAKES 

  The rattlesnakes belong to the viper family which includes some of the most venomous snakes in the world . 

  Rattlers occur in the warmer , drier parts of North America . 

  The body is heavy and fairly thickset , and the contrasting skin surface markings consist of zigzag or diamond-shaped patterns . 

  The distinctive " rattle " at the end of the tail is formed from modified scales and increases in size by one rattle section every time the snake moults its skin , which may be up to four times a year . 

  As the rattle gets longer , the end sections start to break off . 

  The maximum number of rattles observed is 20 . 

  The tail is vibrated and shaken against rocks when the snake is irritated or alarmed and serves as a warning . 

  The characteristically wide , triangular-shaped head accommodates large venom glands as well as powerful muscles necessary for squeezing the fast-acting venom through a single pair of fangs into the prey's body . 

  Frogs , lizards and small mammals are all hunted on the ground ; and the largest rattlesnakes , such as the diamondbacks , which may exceed 2 m ( 6l/ 2 ft ) in length , feed on animals as large as a hare . 

  The eastern diamondback and the western diamondback are regarded as the most dangerous snakes in North America and are responsible for a number of human fatalities every year . 

  As a rule , however , a rattler avoids contact with people and will strike only if cornered . 

  Yet in some parts of the United States , as in Texas , tens of thousands of rattlesnakes are rounded up , killed , skinned and often eaten at barbecues . 

  This is a practice that has threatened several species . 

  The western diamondback rattlesnake is considered to be one of the most deadly snakes in the USA . 

  But this does not justify its ritual slaughter . 

  LIFE ON THE EDGE 

  Mountain goats live amidst the majestic , windswept heights and steep slopes of the Rocky Mountains of western North America , from Colorado in the south to Alaska in the north . 

  It is a bleak landscape , stretching to altitudes of 4,000 m ( 13,000 ft ) or more , and composed of snow , bare rock , scree slopes and ice fields , with only the occasional bush and clump of grass to relieve the harshness of the scenery . 

  This is an exacting environment for any animal to inhabit . 

  Winter lasts for nine months of the year , when temperatures can fall as low as - 50 SYM C , and conditions are made worse by the deadly wind-chill created by high winds . 

  Mountain goats have to contend with narrow ice-covered ledges , deep snow drifts and avalanches . 

  Moreover , their food plants are sparsely distributed , forcing them to take risks in order to get enough to eat . 

  Temperatures during the short summer are somewhat kinder and may on some days reach 20 SYM C. Nonetheless , summer or winter , this is an inhospitable environment and to be able to survive here , the mountain goat needs a special set of structural and behavioural adaptations . 

  Opposite Mountain goats in Jasper National Park , Canada . 

  The result is a very distinctive animal , which has only recently been properly classified . 

  Early explorers of the Pacific coast of North America , who coveted the pure white pelts worn by the resident Indians , thought that it was some kind of polar bear . 

  When Europeans saw the animal alive for the first time , they christened it the mountain goat because of its unusual agility on narrow , icy ledges . 

  Scientists did not help matters when they gave it the generic name Oreamnos , meaning " mountain lamb " . 

  The mountain goat is not a lamb nor , despite its common name , is it a goat . 

  In fact , it belongs to a group of animals known as goat-antelopes , or Caprinae . 

  Its best known relative is the chamois , a native of the European Alps which has also adapted to life at high altitudes on precipitous mountain cliffs . 

  Other less well known relatives are the goral of southern Asia , and the two species of serow : the Japanese serow , which also has a dwarf form on Taiwan ; and the mainland serow of the warmer parts of south-east Asia . 

  Fossil goat-antelopes dating back 35 million years closely resemble the serow , and present day goat-antelopes have probably evolved from a serow-like ancestor . 

  The rare Himalayan tahr -- a distant relative of the mountain goat -- has also adapted to life in harsh mountainous conditions . 

  Other , slightly more distant , relatives of the goat-antelopes include the musk ox , the Himalayan tahr , the takin , the ibex and the mouflon or Barbary sheep . 

  All these animals live in harsh mountainous environments , and many of them , like the serow and chamois , are expert climbers . 

  Finally , and still more distantly , the goat-antelopes are related to cattle , true antelopes , gazelles and other members of the Bovid family , which is itself a subdivision of the large and diverse group known as artiodactyls , or even-toed ungulates . 

  All the even-toed ungulates share certain characteristics , which are important in understanding how the mountain goat has managed to adapt to the particularly inhospitable environment in which it lives . 

  They are all hoofed mammals , with two main toes of roughly equal size ; and they are all ( with the singular exception of the pig , which is an omnivore ) herbivores -- they eat only vegetation . 

  Plant material is poor in nutritive value , and difficult to digest , and herbivores have had to adapt in several ways to make the most of it . 

  The most obvious adaptation is in the structure of their stomachs . 

  These have several compartments -- four in the case of the mountain goat . 

  One compartment , the rumen , is a repository for the raw mass of unprocessed leaves , grass stems or twigs that the animal has just eaten . 

  Here , bacteria get to work on it , softening it up and making it ready for chewing . 

  When the period of feeding is over , and the animal is safe from predators , the contents of the rumen , the " cud " , are released back into the mouth , where a set of specialised cheek teeth take over . 

  The cud is thoroughly masticated -- the jaw can move from side to side as well as up and down -- before it is finally passed into the digestive system where the job of extracting everything of nutritive value will be carried out . 

  As an incidental benefit , the fermentation processes within the stomach generate heat , which is of no small value to an animal living in intensely cold areas . 

  This ability to live off poor vegetation is likely to have been crucial in the evolution of the mountain goat . 

  Millions of years ago , some serow-like ancestor may have been tempted by the relatively secure niche provided by the steep mountain slopes which are safer from the predators than the plains below . 

  Natural selection would then gradually have produced a hardier group of individuals capable of remaining for longer in the remote mountain regions . 

  Eventually , the mountain goat would have evolved . 

  The very flexible hooves of the mountain goat give it maximum grip on precarious slopes and dizzy ledges . 

  The other key characteristic of the even-toed ungulates that would have helped this process along is the structure of the feet . 

  Unlike the hooves of deer , horses and other ungulates ( hoofed mammals ) , which have rigid edges , the hooves of the mountain goat have rubbery , elastic sides . 

  Thus , unlike the others , the mountain goat does not have to walk continuously on the sides of its hooves : when it is leaping or running , the side of the hoof will give , bringing a much greater area of the toe into contact with the ground and greatly increasing the animal's ability to keep a grip on the icy rock . 

  Furthermore , there is a much wider and more flexible gap between the two toes of the mountain goat than there is in other ungulates . 

  Not only does this allow it to " grasp " the ground more firmly , but it also allows the toes to splay out when the goat is descending an icy slope , giving more effective braking power . 

  The chamois , another mountain specialist , is much lighter and consequently much more agile than the mountain goat . 

  Just how important it is for the mountain goat to be footsure is summed up by Doug Chadwick , an American biologist who lived with goats for several years : 

  Take a typical staircase in your home ( 3-35 ) , tilt it to match the angle of the sides of Egypt's Great Pyramids at Giza ( 52 ) , remove some of the steps , and shovel ice and a couple of feet of snow over the whole affair . 

  Then , as long as this is only a mental exercise , try moving the concocted cliff atop an apartment building . 

  Place it right on the edge so that the next step below the bottom is at least a couple of stories down , because even moderately sloping sections of a mountain goat cliff may have forbidding dropoffs at the base . 

  Confronted by physical hazards like this , mountain goats are cautious as well as footsure . 

  If you want to see dazzling feats of mountaineering , with animals leaping from ledge to ledge across gaping chasms , then look to the chamois . 

  The mountain goat is built primarily for steady , tireless climbing rather than speed and great agility : its short legs and short body , which allow it to place all four feet close together , also give it great stability on narrow , uneven ledges . 

  Some idea of the mountain goat's steady strength can be gained by comparing its climbing speed with our own . 

  A 500 m ( 1,750 ft ) ascent , which took an experienced human mountain walker 90 minutes , was climbed by a mountain goat in 20 minutes . 

  It is only young , inexperienced animals that engage in spectacular jumps and other daring manoeuvres . 

  If you were to see an adult goat jump like this , it would usually mean that it was in a desperate situation . 

  The mountain goat's ancestry , as a member of the Bovid family , gave it a good start : it gave the animal the means of subsisting on the poor mountain vegetation , and it provided it with feet that could be adapted to moving around in the precipitous terrain . 

  But much more is required before evolution can produce an animal so finely integrated with its environment . 

  Many other factors -- anatomical , behavioural and social -- play a part in the continuing survival of the mountain goat . 

  A bighorn lamb tries its mountaineering skills . 

  The mortality rate for young mountain mammals is very high . 

  Many fall to their deaths . 

  Keeping warm is obviously a prime necessity in the freezing temperatures of the Rocky Mountains , and the coat of the mountain goat , as the Indians and European explorers discovered , fulfils this need superbly well . 

  Only the musk ox has a denser covering of hair . 

  The mountain goat has a long , shaggy coat , brilliant white immediately after the autumn moult , but dirty yellow by the end of the winter . 

  The thick mane and the " pantaloons " on its legs , together with its small , sharply pointed black horns , give the goat its characteristic and unique appearance . 

  The coat consists of an outer layer of guard hairs , up to 20 cm ( 8 in ) long , overlying a thick layer of fine , cashmere-like wool . 

  The guard hairs are hollow , trapping air within and between them , and the underfur also traps air . 

  Air is one of the best of all insulators against heat loss when not allowed to circulate , so , between them , these two layers provide a high degree of protection from the biting cold . 

  What might seem surprising is that the coat is white . 

  White reflects the heat of the sun rather than absorbing it , whereas black does the opposite . 

  So , except during a few warm days in summer , a white coat would seem to put its wearer at a disadvantage . 

  For smaller animals like the mountain hare , the benefits of camouflage against a background of snow no doubt outweigh the disadvantages . 

  But the mountain goat is big enough to have relatively few predators . 

  The answer to this puzzle may have been provided by some research carried out by American engineers on another large white mammal of very cold regions , the polar bear . 

  The first thing the researchers discovered was that special infrared cameras , designed to pick up the heat given off by warm-blooded animals , failed to detect polar bears -- the insulation provided by their coats is too efficient . 

  Much more interesting , however , were the results of further research into the hairs themselves . 

  The bear's hairs , like those of the mountain goat , are hollow . 

  They are also transparent to ultraviolet light which they conduct , in the manner of an optical fibre , from the tip of the hair to the skin , where its energy is converted into heat . 

  The hairs are transparent only to ultraviolet light : other light in the visible range is reflected , which is why the coat appears white . 

  This remarkable piece of natural technology is now being used in the design of more efficient solar panels . 

  The coat of the mountain goat has some other interesting properties . 

  Hunters often complain about how difficult it is to get a dead mountain goat down from a mountain -- it simply will not slide easily across snow . 

  A closer look at the guard hairs , under a high-powered microscope , reveals why . 

  The hairs have overlapping scales , which gives them a rough texture and increases the friction between goat and snow . 

  If you can imagine being on a steep , snow-covered slope , below which there is a 1000 m ( 3,500 ft ) sheer drop , would you prefer to be wearing a shiny nylon cagoule or a rough old woollen jumper ? 

  The long , rough guard hairs may have saved many a mountain goat from the consequences of an accidental slip . 

  The thick shaggy coat of the mountain goat prepares it for the rigours of the Rocky Mountains' winter . 

  A further response to cold is shown by the variation in body size from the north to the south of the mountain goat's range . 

  There is little difference between males and females , but whereas the largest males in the colder , northerly parts of the range may stand 1.2 m ( 4 ft ) at the shoulders and weigh 140 kg ( 308 lb ) , those from the warmer south reach a maximum of only 70kg ( 1541b ) . 

  The reason is simple : the larger the animal , the smaller its surface area in relation to its volume , and so the smaller the relative area through which heat can be lost . 

  Thus , despite the difficulty of feeding a larger body , the survival value of size becomes greater as it gets colder . 

  Many other animals show similar geographical variation in size . 

  The Dall sheep , another goat-antelope , can be found from British Columbia to Alaska in North America . 

  The annual cycle of the mountain goat , as well as its social life , is determined to a considerable extent by the need to find food . 

  Living where they do , mountain goats can not afford to be fussy about what they eat . 

  Depending on the nature of the local vegetation , they may subsist almost entirely on grasses , or on the leafy branches of Douglas fir . 

  They also eat chokecherry and serviceberry leaves , fern rhizomes , the lichens hanging from branches , and mountain ash twigs and leaves . 

  In their impoverished mountain habitat , they can not afford to waste anything . 

  To pick and choose which plants they were going to eat would put them at a disadvantage since they would waste so much time looking for food , rather than eating it . 

  The poor quality of most of the mountain goat's food , together with the specialised digestive system required to cope with it , imposes a strict daily routine on the animals , which varies little throughout the year . 

  A bout of feeding early in the morning is followed by a lie down during which they chew the cud . 

  This is followed by a midday feed and another rest , which is in turn followed by a prolonged evening feed . 

  This pattern of alternate feeding and resting is characteristic of all grazing animals . 

  The daily routine is disrupted only by extreme weather and by the rut , and even during the rut it is only the males whose activity is much changed . 

  Even though the mountain goat can eat more or less any plant material , there is seldom enough to go round , and the availability and whereabouts of food vary throughout the year . 

  The goat's movements and social interactions show a similar seasonal variation . 

  Food is at its most plentiful during the short summer months , when the snow melts to uncover the higher mountain pastures . 

  At this time of the year , the goats can forage fairly freely and will cover relatively large areas . 

  During a typical summer's day , a mountain goat may travel around a kilometre in search of food . 

  After this brief period of comparative plenty , the snow returns , covering the high pastures in a blanket too thick and hard for the animals to scrape away with their feet . 

  They now have to resort to narrow and exposed ledges , and the shoulders of the mountain , where the continuous high winds prevent a thick cover of snow from settling . 

  Foraging here is a little easier , but it is also more hazardous . 

  The animals' daily movements become much more restricted -- covering an area of no more than a hundred metres square . 

  They become familiar with the area , using regular paths and tracks , so minimising the constant risk of falling . 

  Finally , as the worst of the winter sets in , the goats move down to the more wooded foothills , where the trees moderate both the wind and the snow . 

  Here , they are still able to dig through the snow to uncover whatever sparse winter vegetation remains below . 

  For most of the year , males and females live and feed apart . 

  The separation is at its most apparent in the summer , when the males feed on rougher pastures higher up the mountain . 

  They are often solitary . 

  In contrast , the females tend to live in small groups , with their offspring , foraging on the better pastures lower down . 

  In general , the areas occupied by solitary mature males are less rich in food than the female ranges and this may be a deliberate strategy on the male's part . 

  The theory is that if he stayed with the females throughout the year , he would compete with them for food and would probably take the best of what was available . 

  By leading a solitary existence , he avoids competing with the females that he has fertilised . 

  In other words , by staying away he gives his offspring a better chance of survival . 

  Compared with many other grazing mammals , like the North American bison , African wildebeest and many other antelopes , which all live in large herds , mountain goats are relatively unsocial . 

  The groups formed by the females and kids are small , and solitary animals , usually males , are far from uncommon . 

  Females with very young kids also tend to keep away from the herd . 

  Obviously , from time to time , several groups will meet at a good feeding site or at a salt lick and larger gatherings occur , but small groups are the general rule . 

  There are both advantages and disadvantages in group living . 

  The chief advantage is that it offers greater protection against predators . 

  The disadvantage is that a large number of animals feeding in a small area will exhaust the food supply much more rapidly than would a small number . 

  Unlike many carnivores , for whom a single meal a day is often sufficient , herbivores have to spend much of their time eating . 

  While feeding , they are vulnerable to predators and have to stay constantly alert : head down to feed , head up to look , head down to feed , and so on . 

  For animals in a group , each individual spends less time being vigilant and more time feeding , but the overall level of watchfulness is increased simply because there are more pairs of eyes looking out . 

  Mountain goats may be relatively safe from predators , but they are not totally free of them and the kids are particularly vulnerable . 

  Large billy goats alone may be quite capable of looking after themselves . 

  Thus , females and kids clearly derive some benefit from living in groups . 

  The reason that the groups are not larger is to do with the sparsity of the food supply . 

  The mountain goat's food is well spread out , and nowhere abundant ; larger groups would eat more and force the goats to forage over a wider area . 

  They would spend a disproportionate amount of time moving between feeding areas and , in the bleak heights of the Rocky Mountains , there is little time to spare . 

  With the onset of summer , the snow starts to melt and the mountain goat begins to lose its thick , shaggy winter coat . 

  Mountain goats have to keep alert , for although the mountains have less predators , there are still a few potentially dangerous ones about . 

  These include the grizzly bear , cougar , wolverine , wolf , coyote , and bald and golden eagles . 

  All of these species have been recorded eating mountain goats at one time or another , but whether they are regular or serious predators on the goat is another matter . 

  Doug Chadwick saw grizzlies chase mountain goats on a number of occasions but never saw one caught . 

  In fact it seems likely that mountain goats are very successful at avoiding all these predators . 

  If a bear suddenly appears , the goats head for precipitous ledges where the less agile predator can not follow . 

  If they are cornered by a predator , mountain goats will not hesitate to use their horns to defend themselves . 

  The goat's horns are extremely sharp and potentially lethal , and there is more than one record of a grizzly bear being fatally wounded by a goat . 

  There was also a case in which a hunter's pack of hounds , initially on the scent of a cougar , ended up chasing a large male goat . 

  The goat was cornered and made a stand against the dogs . 

  By the time the hunter caught up with them , the dogs had all been skewered by the goat . 

  Young kids are sometimes seized by bald eagles . 

  The predators that mountain goats appear to fear most are eagles . 

  Goats will even toss their horns at the shadow of an eagle flying overhead , and will chase eagles off ledges . 

  Eagles are primarily interested in very young goats and there are several observations of golden eagles and bald eagles snatching young kids from beside their mothers . 

  As well as taking kids , eagles also try to flush or knock older goats off ledges . 

  No one has seen a mountain goat killed in this way , but in Europe , golden eagles regularly knock chamois from cliff ledges in order to feed on their carcasses . 

  On one occasion a biologist found a two-year-old goat and a golden eagle locked together at the foot of a cliff . 

  The eagle still had its talons in the goat , and the goat had its horns embedded in the eagle . 

  While bears , wolves and the like undoubtedly eat mountain goats , they probably do so through scavenging for carcasses rather than through direct predation . 

  The most serious enemy of the mountain goat is snow , or more precisely avalanches . 

  In late winter , avalanches are common and many goats are swept away . 

  Predators like bears , coyotes and Lynx regularly patrol the bottom of avalanches looking for carcasses . 

  Snow kills goats in other ways too . 

  Foraging for food in the depths of winter often means travelling through deep snow , and this takes its toll of the goat population . 

  Small , immature goats suffer most ; they find moving around in deep snow most difficult and demanding . 

  Their small size means that they lose heat more rapidly than the adults . 

  Moreover , since immature goats are subordinate to older ones , they may well have to give up any patch of food they find to a larger , more dominant animal . 

  All in all , the young have the odds stacked against them , especially in a hard winter . 

  Normally , about half the kids born each year will be dead by the following spring . 

  In a severe winter , the figure can reach 80 per cent . 

  Although this may seem harsh it is actually natural selection in action . 

  Hundreds of generations of goats have been subjected to these ordeals each winter , and the best adapted animals have survived . 

  Severe winters take their toll of adults too . 

  Females that have struggled to obtain enough food throughout the winter and emerge in spring in poor condition , may fail to conceive , or may give birth to a weak and sickly kid . 

  Snow , however , is not always a disadvantage to mountain goats . 

  It can help camouflage them and , paradoxically , it can sometimes help them stay warm . 

  Snow is a good insulator , and the temperature inside a snow cave will remain at just above freezing , regardless of the temperature outside . 

  When conditions are bad , mountain goats will dig a deep bed in the snow , or hide in caves and under rocks . 

  Grizzly bears feed on salmon moving up river to spawn . 

  When times are hard a grizzly may take a mountain goat . 

  In these particularly harsh circumstances , it seems likely that the mountain goat has adapted to living in small groups as a compromise . 

  It is the solution that offers the best balance between advantages and disadvantages -- the animals gain the greatest degree of mutual protection from predators whilst sacrificing the least in terms of their ability to find food in the inhospitable terrain . 

  Wherever animals live in groups , some kind of hierarchy is established . 

  Within the mountain goat community , this leads to continual tension . 

  Mountain goats are unusual in that mild displays of aggression are especially frequent . 

  They continually threaten , nudge and jostle each other ; what they are doing is competing for rank . 

  The social system is based on a hierarchy within which the most dominant individuals take the greatest share of food . 

  The largest individuals , usually the oldest ones , tend to be the most dominant , and the smallest and youngest the least . 

  Males usually dominate females , but adult males are absent from the herd for most of the year . 

  The quest for dominance starts at an early age , and even kids spar with one another . 

  As a young animal grows its rank changes , but not automatically ; it must fight for every increase in dominance it achieves . 

  Females also compete with each other for rank , on their own behalf and on behalf of their kids . 

  Dominance relationships thus exist both between and within age classes . 

  Dominance can make the difference between life and death , or breeding and not breeding . 

  It is in each individual's interest to defend its place in the " peck order " vigorously , as well as to challenge those higher up -- hence the almost continual challenging that goes on in goat society . 

  Actual fighting between individuals is rare . 

  The damage that goats can inflict on each other with their sharp horns is so great that aggression has become highly ritualised . 

  Two goats will circle head to tail in a display of strength , tossing their heads and posturing and grunting at each other . 

  They seldom come to blows . 

  In one study , less than 5 per cent of the aggressive encounters involved the goats touching each other . 

  After an aggressive incident , the subordinate goat will retreat in a low-rumped posture -- trying to avoid a blow to its flanks . 

  In an extreme case , where a subordinate animal is cornered by another , it will actually squat -- the ultimate sign of submission in goat society . 

  When fighting does occur -- as when two evenly matched individuals meet -- it seldom results in injury . 

  Unlike true goats , mountain sheep and musk ox , mountain goats rarely direct their blows to their rivals' heads . 

  In fact , one of the features that sets the goat-antelopes apart from their relatives is the relatively thin and fragile skull . 

  In contrast , such animals as the musk ox , ibex , Barbary and bighorn sheep , possess large horns attached to a massively reinforced skull . 

  In these species , head-butting is the normal form of fighting . 

  Mountain goats , on the other hand , aim for the opponent's rump and , just as the musk ox's skull is enormously reinforced , so too is the skin on the mountain goat's rump . 

  It is about 21 mm ( nearly an inch ) thick , compared with about 3 mm ( 1:8 in ) over the rest of its body . 

  ( As a comparison , the rump skin of a domesticated goat is about 2 mm ( in thick . ) 

  As a result , the goat is well protected against its opponent's horns , and a fight will usually end with the subordinate animal signalling submission , before any real damage is done . 

  Because aggression is ritualised in this way , it poses few threats to the individuals involved . 

  Most aggressive encounters serve more to confirm the existing social hierarchy than to change it . 

  However , there is one time of the year when the stakes are much higher and the rules are correspondingly different . 

  This is during the rut . 

  Fighting , which is primarily between mature males , takes on a much more serious tone . 

  The sole purpose of a billy goat's life is to sire offspring , and the more he fathers , the greater is his success in evolutionary terms . 

  A goat that produces no kids is an evolutionary failure . 

  Compared to mere jostling for social position , fighting for females is a very important matter indeed . 

  The ibex is a distant relative of the mountain goat . 

  The sound of their horns clashing during the rut can be heard up to 8 km away . 

  The rut starts in late October , after the mountain goats have completed their moult , and are sporting their new winter coats . 

  A solitary males will patrol the cliffs in search of bands of sexually mature females . 

  Once he has found a group , the male stays with it but at a reasonable distance of perhaps 30 or 40 m ( 100-130 ft ) . 

  The male's usual pattern is to position himself on higher ground , above the females , keeping careful watch on their every move . 

  He may shadow them for two weeks , gradually getting closer and closer . 

  During this time he does not feed , but relies on his body fat , accumulated during the period of good summer feeding -- this prolonged fast may later prove very costly . 

  Every so often the male will dig a rutting pit in the earth and wallow in it , spreading his goaty odour around . 

  He also rubs his scent glands , located just behind each horn , on to clumps of grass and bushes . 

  His painstakingly slow approach is necessary because he might otherwise frighten off the smaller females . 

  Eventually , after two or three weeks , he has moved so close to the females that he virtually touches them . 

  Up to this point , the females have assiduously ignored the male , but soon he starts testing them to see if they are ready to mate . 

  He sniffs and licks their genital areas and then curls back his upper lip in a characteristic facial gesture , known as flehmen . 

  The purpose of this lip curl is to lodge the scent or taste of the female's urine in a particularly sensitive part of his nasal cavity , the Jacobson's organ , so that he can assess the female's reproductive condition . 

  If the female is " on heat " -- in oestrus -- she will accept the male and mating takes place . 

  If she is not ready , she will move away from the male and the male will not attempt to mate with her . 

  As in many mammals , oestrus lasts a short time ; just 48 hours in the mountain goat . 

  Since all the females in a group tend to come into oestrus at around the same time , the male goat will have a busy two or three days . 

  A male bighorn sheep curls back his upper lip in an attempt to determine the reproductive state of a female close by . 

  Given the amount of time that the male has invested in his group of females , it is hardly surprising that he is ready to defend them vigorously against other males . 

  If another male approaches , it is usually chased off immediately . 

  However , if the intruder is of a similar size or larger , then he might challenge the " owner " . 

  At this stage aggression is still highly ritualised , but if one animal fails to submit then serious fighting can occur . 

  The goats lunge at each other with their horns and try to flip each other off the ledge . 

  If the weaker goat gets itself into a position from which it can not escape , it may be gored , and indeed may be killed . 

  Valerius Geist , a well-respected mountain sheep biologist , once found a mountain goat that had been killed by another and had no less than 32 horn punctures , including several injuries to the lungs and heart . 

  Although the rewards of breeding may be high for males that successfully mate with several females , the costs may be substantial too . 

  The long fast during the rut , together with fighting and mating , may leave the male in poor condition for the winter . 

  There are invariably more mature female goats around than males , and the inference is that the males , as a result of their arduous rut , are more likely to die during the winter . 

  Once again , natural selection is at work , for only the strongest males will survive . 

  After the rut the males separate from the groups of females and begin their more or less solitary existence once again . 

  The kids are born in the next year with the coming of spring and summer , so that they can take full advantage of the brief period when food is relatively plentiful . 

  Only a single kid is born at a time ; twins are extremely rare . 

  Slightly wobbly at first , the kid soon learns to stand and to stay close to its mother . 

  In fact , the young goat will remain beside its mother for at least a year . 

  The mother will protect it from predators , such as eagles , and will try to ensure that it does not fall down the mountainside by always standing on the downhill side of it . 

  It is more likely that a kid will die than reach sexual maturity at three years old . 

  Nevertheless , the mountain goat maintains a tenuous but firm hold in its cruel environment , even though catastrophe is never far away . 

  For young and adults alike , it is , both literally and metaphorically , a life on the edge . 

  A female mountain goat licks minerals from the soil . 

  The mother makes sure she is always down-hill from her kid in case it falls . 

  HUNTING MOUNTAIN GOATS 

  Deer , antelope , buffalo and other grazing mammals have long been hunted by man for their meat and hides and for the other products they yield . 

  In earlier times in North America these animals provided the Indians with many of their daily needs . 

  But it was commercial hunting by European settlers that devastated the animals' populations . 

  The classic case is that of the American bison , reduced from millions to a handful of individuals , and saved from extinction by a hair's breadth . 

  Men continue to hunt in North America , rarely these days for subsistence , but more usually for sport . 

  But the effects can still be devastating . 

  The mountain goat population was reduced from an estimated 100,000 to 50,000 between the years 1961-1981 . 

  The mountain goat hunting season lasts 11 weeks from 15 September to the end of November . 

  Hunters must obtain a permit and there are bag limits on the numbers of goats that can be shot . 

  Despite these restrictions and regulations , goat numbers have continued to decline . 

  There is a good reason for this . 

  Whereas other ungulates like white-tailed deer and moose produce a surplus of young each year , allowing a certain proportion of the population to be harvested without affecting the breeding stock , the same is not true of mountain goats . 

  Compared with deer , mountain goats have a slow reproductive rate . 

  Whereas three-quarters of all female deer produce young each year , only a little over half of all female goats do so . 

  Moreover , while twins are common among deer , they are virtually unknown among goats . 

  Add to this the fact that among mountain goats most of the winter mortality falls on the youngest animals and it is not hard to see why there are few surplus goats for the hunter's guns . 

  Several other factors have contributed to the mountain goat's decline . 

  Firstly , their open habitat makes them extremely visible to human hunters . 

  They can be seen from several miles away , and they can also be shot ( not necessarily killed ) over considerable distances with high-powered rifles . 

  Secondly , the hunting season also coincides with the rut . 

  As we have seen , this is a crucial part of the mountain goat's annual cycle and one that is easily disrupted by hunting . 

  Hunting statistics can be misleading since they record only those animals actually taken by hunters . 

  There are no estimates for the wounding rates of mountain goats , but for other game species it may be as high as 40 per cent . 

  Among the hunting fraternity the mountain goat has a reputation for being difficult to kill cleanly and is sadly renowned for its ability to " carry a lot of lead " . 

  Because of the competition between males , relatively few of them ever breed , whereas almost all females do . 

  Hunting would therefore have less of an impact on goat populations if hunters avoided killing females . 

  Unfortunately , however , the differences in appearance and behaviour between male and female goats are so subtle that some hunters are incapable of distinguishing between them . 

  HORNS 

  Mountain goats possess slim , dagger-like horns . 

  Some of their cousins , however , bear monstrously large , curved horns , designed for butting rather than jabbing . 

  The fights of mountain sheep both look , and sound , spectacular as males clash horns with a resounding " crack " that echoes through the mountains . 

  Fighting occurs during the rut as males compete for dominance . 

  As in mountain goats and other animals , fighting occurs only between similarly matched individuals . 

  If two mountain sheep of markedly different size meet each other , the smaller one will behave as a subordinate and retreat . 

  If , on the other hand , the two sheep are of similar size they can assess each other only by fighting . 

  The sheep often use gravity to increase the force of their attack : a male that stands above another on a hillside is at a distinct advantage ; he can drop on to his opponent using the full weight of his body . 

  The huge horns are used both as a weapon and as a shield . 

  A sheep that is attacked will spin round to make sure that the attacker's horns clash with his own . 

  The thick , air-filled bone of the skull helps to cushion the blow . 

  This dual function of horns is common to almost all ungulates , and individuals with a damaged or lost horn can both inflict and receive severe injuries . 

  The diversity in the size and shape of ungulate horns and antlers is remarkable . 

  The most extreme form was the now extinct Irish elk , with its 30 kg ( 66 lb ) pair of antlers . 

  It is not clear why horns and antlers should differ so much in shape , but we do know something about why size varies so markedly . 

  Among those animals where a few males mate with most of the females and where , as a result , competition between males for females is intense , weapons such as antlers , horns and teeth are particularly well developed . 

  Most primates , for example , use their canine teeth for fighting . 

  In those species like the baboons , where males monopolise a group of females , the male's teeth are much larger than those of more monogamous species . 

  In the same way , the most polygamous species of goats and sheep have the largest horns or antlers . 

  Although the Irish elk is no longer with us , just from the size of its horns we can be fairly certain that it was polygamous , and that a few males mated with most of the females . 

  Below left A goat's age can be determined by analysing the growth rings around the horns . 

  Below right A male bighorn sheep with a particularly fine set of horns . 

  MATING SYSTEMS 

  The extent to which males can monopolise females for mating depends upon how females are distributed . 

  If females are well spaced out then a male would have great difficulty in monopolising more than one at time . 

  If females are concentrated together then it is much easier for a single male to herd them and defend them from other males . 

  When this happens competition between males for the right to breed is intense and results in a marked difference between the sizes of males and females . 

  At the other extreme , where males generally mate with only a single female , the sexes are much more similar in size and appearance . 

  What determines the spacing of females ? 

  The answer for most ungulates appears to be their food supply . 

  The mountain goat's food supply is thinly distributed over the mountain slopes and cliff ledges , and so are the goats . 

  As a consequence they typically occur in very small groups and males therefore mate with fewer females each year . 

  Competition between male mountain goats is rather less than in some other species and as an evolutionary result the sexes are very similar in size and appearance . 

  Amongst the deer , these patterns are well defined . 

  The muntjac and roe deer are browsers , living either singly or in very small groups throughout the year in dense woodland . 

  At the other extreme are those species like sika , Pere David's deer and wapiti , which eat mainly grass and live in open environments . 

  These deer tend to form large herds , and during the breeding season males defend large harems of females . 

  As a result , males in these species are usually noticeably larger than the females . 

  This difference in size between the sexes has evolved because males have to fight in order to obtain and maintain a harem , and bigger males are better fighters . 

  The male roe deer's branched antlers are used in the breeding season when rutting against other males . 

  Although the female may be mated in July she will not give birth until the following May after a gestation period of almost 300 days . 

